
the aardvark rdvrk ardvark orycteropus afer is a mediumsized burrowing nocturnal mammal native to africa it is the only 
living species of the order tubulidentata although other prehistoric species and genera of tubulidentata are known 
unlike new world edentates such as the giant anteater it has a long piglike snout which is used to sniff out food it 
roams over most of the southern twothirds of the african continent avoiding mainly rocky areas a nocturnal feeder it 
subsists on ants and termites which it will dig out of their hills using its sharp claws and powerful legs it also digs 
to create burrows in which to live and rear its young it receives a least concern rating from the iucn although its 
numbers seem to be decreasing naming and taxonomy the aardvark is sometimes colloquially called african ant bear 
anteater or the cape anteater after the cape of good hope the name aardvark dutch pronunciation rtfrk comes from earlier 
afrikaans erdvark and means earth pig or ground pig aarde earthground vark pig because of its burrowing habits similar 
origin to the name groundhog the name orycteropus means burrowing foot and the name afer refers to africa the name of 
the aardvarkss order tubulidentata comes from the tubule style teeth the aardvark is not closely related to the pig 
rather it is the sole extant representative of the obscure mammalian order tubulidentata in which it is usually 
considered to form one variable species of the genus orycteropus the sole surviving genus in the family orycteropodidae 
the aardvark is not closely related to the south american anteater despite sharing some characteristics and a 
superficial resemblance the similarities are based on convergent evolution the closest living relatives of the aardvark 
are the elephant shrews along with the sirenians hyraxes elephants and tenrecs with their extinct relatives these 
animals form the superorder afrotheria studies of the brain have shown the similarities with condylarthra based on 
fossils bryan patterson has concluded that early relatives of the aardvark appeared in africa around the end of the 
paleocene the mysterious pleistocene plesiorycteropus from madagascar was when first described originally thought to be 
a tubulidentate that was descended from ancestors that entered the island during the eocene too many subtle anatomical 
differences coupled with recent molecular evidence now lead researchers to believe that plesiorycteropus is a relative 
of the golden mole and tenrecs that achieved an aardvarklike appearance and ecological niche through convergent 
evolution the first known tubulidentate was probably myorycteropus africanus from kenyan miocene deposits the earliest 
example from the orycteropus genus was the orycteropus mauritanicus found in algeria in deposits from the middle miocene 
with an equally aged version found in kenya fossils from the aardvark have been dated to million years and have been 
located throughout europe and the near east a close relative lived in madagascar during the last ice age subspecies the 
aardvark has seventeen poorly defined subspecies listed orycteropus afer afer o a adametzi grote o a aethiopicus 
sundevall o a angolensis zukowsky haltenorth o a erikssoni lnnberg o a faradjius hatt o a haussanus matschie o a 
kordofanicus rothschild o a lademanni grote o a leptodon hirst o a matschiei grote o a observandus grote o a ruvanensis 
grote o a senegalensis lesson o a somalicus lydekker o a wardi lydekker o a wertheri matschie description the aardvark 
is vaguely piglike in appearance its body is stout with a prominently arched back and is sparsely covered with coarse 
hairs the limbs are of moderate length with the rear legs being longer than the forelegs the front feet have lost the 
pollex or thumb resulting in four toes while the rear feet have all five toes each toe bears a large robust nail which 
is somewhat flattened and shovellike and appears to be intermediate between a claw and a hoof whereas the aardvark is 
considered digitigrade it appears at time to be plantigrade this confusion happens because when it squats it stands on 
its soles an aardvarks weight is typically between and kilograms lb an aardvarks length is usually between and 
centimetres ft and can reach lengths of metres ft in when its tail which can be up to centimetres in is taken into 
account it is centimetres in tall at the shoulder and has a girth of about centimetres ft it is the largest member of 
the proposed clade afroinsectiphilia the aardvark is pale yellowishgray in color and often stained reddishbrown by soil 
the aardvarks coat is thin and the animals primary protection is its tough skin its hair is short on its head and tail 
however its legs tend to have longer hair the hair on the majority of its body is grouped in clusters of hairs the hair 
surrounding its nostrils is dense to help filter particulate matter out as it digs its tail is very thick at the base 
and gradually tapers head the greatly elongated head is set on a short thick neck and the end of the snout bears a disc 
which houses the nostrils it contains a thin but complete zygomatic arch the head of the aardvark contains many unique 
and different features one of the most distinctive characteristics of the tubulidentata is their teeth instead of having 
a pulp cavity each tooth has a cluster of thin hexagonal upright parallel tubes of vasodentin a modified form of dentine 
with individual pulp canals held together by cementum the number of columns is dependent on the size of the tooth with 
the largest having about the teeth have no enamel coating and are worn away and regrow continuously the aardvark is born 
with conventional incisors and canines at the front of the jaw which fall out and are not replaced adult aardvarks have 
only cheek teeth at the back of the jaw and have a dental formula of these remaining teeth are peglike and rootless and 
are of unique composition the teeth consist of upper and lower jaw molars the nasal area of the aardvark is another 
unique area as it contains ten nasal conchae more than any other placental mammal the sides of the nostrils are thick 
with hair the tip of the snout is highly mobile and is moved by modified mimetic muscles the fleshy dividing tissue 
between its nostrils probably has sensory functions but it is uncertain if it is olfactory or vibration in nature its 
nose is made up of more turbinate bones than any other mammal with between and compared to dogs with to with a large 
quantity of turbinate bones the aardvark has more space for the moist epithelium which is the location of the olfactory 
bulb the nose contains nine olfactory bulbs more than any other mammal its keen sense of smell is not just from the 
quantity of bulbs in the nose but also in the development of the brain as its olfactory lobe is very developed the snout 
resembles an elongated pig snout the mouth is small and tubular typical of species that feed on ants and termites the 
aardvark has a long thin snakelike protruding tongue as much as centimetres in long and elaborate structures supporting 
a keen sense of smell the ears which are very effective are disproportionately long about centimetres in long the eyes 
are small for its head and consist only of rods digestive system the aardvarks stomach has a muscular pyloric area that 
acts as a gizzard to grind swallowed food up thereby rendering chewing unnecessary its cecum is large both sexes emit a 
strong smelling secretion from an anal gland its salivary glands are highly developed and almost completely ring the 
neck their output is what causes the tongue to maintain its tackiness the female has two pairs of teats in the inguinal 
region genetically speaking the aardvark is a living fossil as its chromosomes are highly conserved reflecting much of 
the early eutherian arrangement before the divergence of the major modern taxa habitat and range aardvarks live in 
subsaharan africa where there is suitable habitat for them to live such as savannas grasslands woodlands and bushland 
and available food ie ants and termites they hide in dark underground burrows to avoid the warm weather the only major 
habitat that they are not present in is swamp forest as the high water table interferes with digging they have been 
documented as high as metres ft in ethiopia they are known to live throughout subsaharan africa all the way to south 
africa with few exceptions these exceptions are coastal areas of namibia ivory coast and ghana they are also not present 
in madagascar they avoid rocky terrain as it causes problems with digging ecology and behavior aardvarks live for up to 
years in captivity its keen hearing warns it of predators lions leopards hunting dogs hyenas and pythons the aardvarks 
main predators are lions leopards hunting dogs hyenas and pythons some humans also hunt aardvarks for meat aardvarks can 
dig fast or run in zigzag fashion to elude enemies but if all else fails they will strike with their claws tail and 
shoulders sometimes flipping onto their backs lying motionless except to lash out with all four feet they are capable of 
causing substantial damage to unprotected areas of an attacker they will also dig to escape as they can when pressed dig 
extremely quickly their thick skin also protects them to some extent feeding the aardvark is nocturnal and is a solitary 
creature that feeds almost exclusively on ants and termites formivore the only fruit eaten by aardvarks is the aardvark 
cucumber in fact the cucumber and the aardvark have a symbiotic relationship as they eat the subterranean fruit then 
defecate the seeds near their burrows which then grow rapidly due to the loose soil and fertile nature of the area the 
time spent in the intestine of the aardvark helps the fertility of the seed and the fruit provides needed moisture for 
the aardvark they avoid eating the african driver ant and red ants due to their stringent diet requirements they require 
a large range to survive an aardvark emerges from its burrow in the late afternoon or shortly after sunset and forages 
over a considerable home range encompassing to kilometres to mi while foraging for food the aardvark will keep its nose 
to the ground and its ears pointed forward which indicates that both smell and hearing are involved in the search for 
food they zigzag as they forage and will usually not repeat a route for days as they appear to allow time for the 
termite nests to recover before feeding on it again during a foraging period they will stop and dig a v shaped trench 
with their forefeet and then sniff it profusely as a means to explore their location when a concentration of ants or 
termites is detected the aardvark digs into it with its powerful front legs keeping its long ears upright to listen for 
predators and takes up an astonishing number of insects with its long sticky tongueas many as in one night have been 
recorded its claws enable it to dig through the extremely hard crust of a termite or ant mound quickly it avoids 
inhaling the dust by sealing the nostrils when successful the aardvarks long up to centimetres in tongue licks up the 
insects the termites biting or the ants stinging attacks are rendered futile by the tough skin after an aardvark visit 
at a termite mound other animals will visit to pick up all the leftovers termite mounds alone dont provide enough food 
for the aardvark so they look for termites that are on the move when these insects move they can form columns metres ft 
long and these tend to provide easy pickings with little effort exerted by the aardvark these columns are more common in 
areas of livestock or other hoofed animals the trampled grass and dung attract termites from odontotermes microtermes 
and pseudacanthotermes genera on a nightly basis they tend to be more active during the first portion of the night time 
however they dont seem to prefer bright or dark nights over the other during adverse weather or if disturbed they will 
retreat to their burrow systems they cover between and kilometres and mi per night however some studies have shown that 
they may traverse as far as kilometres mi in a night vocalization the aardvark is a rather quiet animal however it does 
make soft grunting sounds as it forages and loud grunts as it makes for its tunnel entrance it makes a bleating sound if 
frightened when it is threatened it will make for one of its burrows if one is not close it will dig a new one rapidly 
this new one will be short and require the aardvark to back out when the coast is clear movement the aardvark is known 
to be a good swimmer and has been witnessed successfully swimming in strong currents it can dig a yard of tunnel in 
about five minutes but otherwise moves fairly slowly when leaving the burrow at night they pause at the entrance for 
about ten minutes sniffing and listening after this period of watchfulness it will bound out and within seconds it will 
be metres ft away it will then pause prick its ears twisting its head to listen then jump and move off to start foraging 
aside from digging out ants and termites the aardvark also excavates burrows in which to live of which they generally 
fall into three categories burrows made while foraging refuge and resting location and permanent homes temporary sites 
are scattered around the home range and are used as refuges while the main burrow is also used for breeding main burrows 
can be deep and extensive have several entrances and can be as long as metres ft these burrows can be large enough for a 
man to enter the aardvark changes the layout of its home burrow regularly and periodically moves on and makes a new one 
the old burrows are an important part of the african wildlife scene as they are vacated then they are inhabited by 
smaller animals like the african wild dog anteating chat nycteris thebaica and warthogs other animals that use them are 
hares mongooses hyenas owls pythons and lizards without these refuges many animals would die during wildfire season only 
mothers and young share burrows however the aardvark is known to live in small family groups or as a solitary creature 
if attacked in the tunnel it will escape by digging out of the tunnel thereby placing the fresh fill between it and its 
predator or if it decides to fight it will roll onto its back and attack with its claws the aardvark has been known to 
sleep in a recently excavated ant nest which also serves as protection from its predators reproduction aardvarks pair 
only during the breeding season after a gestation period of seven months one cub weighing around kilograms lb is born 
during mayjuly when born the young has flaccid ears and many wrinkles when nursing it will nurse off each teat in 
succession after two weeks the folds of skin disappear and after three the ears can be held upright after weeks body 
hair starts growing it is able to leave the burrow to accompany its mother after only two weeks and is eating termites 
at weeks and is weaned by weeks by three months of age the young has been weaned at six months of age it is able to dig 
its own burrows but it will often remain with the mother until the next mating season and is sexually mature from 
approximately two years of age conservation aardvarks were thought to have declining numbers however this is possibly 
due to the fact that they are not readily seen there are no definitive counts because of their nocturnal and secretive 
habits however their numbers seem to be stable overall they are not considered common anywhere in africa but due to 
their large range they maintain sufficient numbers there may be a slight decrease in numbers in eastern northern and 
western africa southern african numbers are not decreasing it receives an official designation from the iucn as least 
concern however they are a species in a precarious situation as they are so dependent on such specific food therefore if 
a problem arises with the abundance of termites the species as a whole would be affected drastically aardvarks handle 
captivity well the first zoo to have one was london zoo in which had an animal from south africa mythology and popular 
culture in african folklore the aardvark is much admired because of its diligent quest for food and its fearless 
response to soldier ants hausa magicians make a charm from the heart skin forehead and nails of the aardvark which they 
then proceed to pound together with the root of a certain tree wrapped in a piece of skin and worn on the chest the 
charm is said to give the owner the ability to pass through walls or roofs at night the charm is said to be used by 
burglars and those seeking to visit young girls without their parents permission also some tribes such as the margbetu 
ayanda and logo will use aardvark teeth to make bracelets which are regarded as good luck charms the meat which has a 
resemblance to pork is eaten in certain cultures the egyptian god set is said by some to have the head of an aardvark or 
to be part aardvark the titular character of arthur an animated television series for children based on a book series 
and produced by wgbh shown in more than countries is an aardvark footnotes references external links aardvarks at the 
bronx zoo retrieved iucnssc afrotheria specialist group aardvark website antbearaardvark at wackywildlifewonderscom 
information at animal diversity web university of michigan museum of zoology the biology of the aardvark orycteropus 
afer diploma thesis without pictures the biology of the aardvark orycteropus afer same diploma thesis including the 
pictures some good photos of baby aardvarks texts on wikisource the aardvark or earthhog in popular science monthly vol 
march aardvark the new students reference work aardvark colliers new encyclopedia 