
the aardwolf proteles cristata is a small insectivorous mammal native to east africa and southern africa its name means 
earth wolf in the afrikaans dutch language it is also called maanhaar jackal literally mane jackal in afrikaans or civet 
hyena based on the secretions civet from their anal glands the aardwolf is in the same family as the hyenas unlike many 
of its relatives in the order carnivora the aardwolf does not hunt large animals or even eat meat on a regular basis 
instead it eats insects mainly termites one aardwolf can eat about termites during a single night by using its long 
sticky tongue to capture them the aardwolf lives in the scrublands of eastern and southern africa these are open lands 
covered with stunted trees and shrubs the aardwolf is nocturnal resting in burrows during the day and emerging at night 
to seek food their diet consists mainly of termites and insect larvae taxonomy the aardwolf is the only surviving 
species in the mammalian subfamily protelinae there is disagreement as to whether there are any subspecies or if the 
species is monotypic some sources say that there are two subspecies proteles cristatus cristatus of southern africa and 
proteles cristatus septentrionalis of east africa whereas others say it is monotypic recent studies have shown that the 
aardwolf probably broke away from the rest of the hyena family early on however how early is still unclear as the fossil 
record and the genetic studies differ by million years the aardwolf is generally classified with the hyaenidae though it 
was formerly placed into the family protelidae early on scientists felt that it was merely mimicking the striped hyena 
which subsequently led to the creation of the hyaenidae family etymology the genus name proteles comes from two words 
both of greek origin protos and teleos which combined means complete in front based on the fact that they have five toes 
on their front feet and four on the rear the species name cristatus comes from latin and means provided with a comb 
relating to their mane physical characteristics the aardwolf resembles a very thin striped hyena but with a more slender 
muzzle black vertical stripes on a coat of yellowish fur and a long distinct mane down the midline of the neck and back 
they also have one or two diagonal stripes down the fore and hindquarters along with several stripes on its legs the 
mane is raised during confrontations in order to make the aardwolves appear larger it is missing the throat spot that 
others in the family have its lower leg from the knee down is all black and its tail is bushy with a black tip the 
aardwolf is about to centimetres to in long excluding its bushy tail which is about centimetres in long and stands about 
to centimetres to in tall at the shoulders an adult aardwolf weighs approximately kilograms lb sometimes reaching 
kilograms lb the aardwolfs in the south of the continent tend to be smaller about kilograms lb whereas the eastern 
version weighs more around kilograms lb the front feet have five toes each unlike the fourtoed hyena the teeth and skull 
are similar to those of the hyena though smaller and its cheek teeth are specialised for eating insects it does still 
have canines however unlike the hyena these teeth are used primarily for fighting and defense its ears which are large 
are very similar to the striped hyena as the aardwolf ages it will normally lose some of its teeth though this has 
little impact on their feeding habits due to the softness of the insects that they eat the aardwolf has two anal glands 
that secrete a musky fluid for marking territory and for communicating with other aardwolves distribution and habitat 
aardwolves live in open dry plains and bushland avoiding mountainous areas due to their specific food requirements they 
are only found in regions where termites of the family hodotermitidae occur termites of this family depend on dead and 
withered grass and are most populous in heavily grazed grasslands and savannahs including farmland for most of the year 
aardwolves spend time in shared territories consisting of up to a dozen dens which are occupied for six weeks at a time 
there are two distinct populations one in southern africa and another in east and northeast africa the species does not 
occur in the intermediary miombo forests an adult pair along with their most recent offspring will occupy a territory of 
square kilometres sq mi behavior aardwolves are shy and nocturnal sleeping in underground burrows by day they will on 
occasion during the winter become diurnal feeders this happens during the coldest periods as they then stay in at night 
to conserve heat they have often been mistaken for solitary animals in fact they live as monogamous pairs with their 
young if their territory is infringed upon they will chase the intruder up to metres ft or to the border if the intruder 
is caught which rarely happens a fight will occur which is accompanied by soft clucking hoarse barking and a type of 
roar the majority of incursions occur during mating season when they can occur times per week when food is scarce the 
stringent territorial system may be abandoned and as many as three pairs may occupy a single territory the territory is 
marked by both sexes as they both have developed anal glands from which they extrude a black substance that is smeared 
on rocks or grass stalks in millimetre in long streaks they often mark near termite mounds within their territory every 
minutes or so if they are patrolling their territorial boundaries the marking frequency increases drastically to once 
every metres ft at this rate an individual may mark marks per hour and upwards of per night an aardwolf pair may have up 
to ten dens and numerous middens within their territory when they deposit feces at their middens they dig a small hole 
and then cover it with sand their dens are usually abandoned aardvark springhare or porcupine dens or on occasion they 
are crevices in rocks they will also dig their own dens or enlarge dens started by springhares they typically will only 
use one or two dens at a time rotating through all of their dens every six months during the summer they may rest 
outside their den during the night and sleep underground during the heat of the day aardwolfs are not fast runners nor 
are they particularly adept at fighting off predators therefore when threatened the aardwolf will attempt to mislead its 
foe by doubling back on its tracks if confronted it will raise its mane in an attempt to appear more menacing it will 
also emit a foulsmelling liquid from its anal glands feeding the aardwolf feeds primarily on termites and more 
specifically on trinervitermes this genus of termites has different species throughout the aardwolfs range in east 
africa they eat trinervitermes bettonianus and in central africa they eat trinervitermes rhodesiensis and finally in 
southern africa they eat trinervitermes trinervoides their technique consists of licking them off the ground as opposed 
to the aardvark which will dig into the mound they locate their food by sound and also from the scent secreted by the 
soldier termites an aardwolf may consume up to termites per night using its sticky long tongue they do not destroy the 
termite mound or consume the entire colony thus ensuring that the termites can rebuild and provide a continuous supply 
of food they will often memorize the location of such nests and return to them every few months during certain seasonal 
events such as the onset of the rainy season and the cold of midwinter the primary termites become scarce and so the 
need for other forms of sustenance becomes pronounced during these times the southern aardwolf will seek out hodotermes 
mossambicus a type of harvester termite a termite active in the afternoon which explains some of their diurnal behavior 
in the winter the eastern aardwolf will during the rainy season get variety by subsisting on termites from the 
odontotermes and macrotermes genera they are also known to feed on other insects larvae eggs and some sources say 
occasionally small mammals and birds but these constitute a very small percentage of their total diet unlike other 
hyenas aardwolves do not scavenge or kill larger animals contrary to popular myths aardwolfs do not eat carrion and if 
they are seen eating while hunched over a dead carcass it is actually eating larvae and beetles also contrary to some 
sources they do not like meat unless it is finely ground or cooked for them the adult aardwolf was formerly assumed to 
forage in small groups however more recent research has shown that they are primarily solitary foragers necessary 
because of the scarcity of their insect prey their primary source trinervitermes forages in small but dense patches of 
centimetres in while foraging the aardwolf will cover about kilometre mi per hour which translates to kilometres mi per 
summer night and kilometres mi per winter night breeding the breeding season varies depending on their location but 
normally takes place during autumn or spring in south africa breeding occurs in early july during the breeding season 
unpaired male aardwolves will search their own territory as well as others for a female to mate with dominant males will 
also mate opportunistically with the females of less dominant neighboring aardwolves which can result in conflict 
between rival males dominant males will even go a step further and as the breeding season approaches they will make 
increasingly greater and greater incursions onto weaker males territories as the female comes into oestrus they will add 
pasting to their tricks inside of the other territories sometimes doing so more in rivals territories than their own 
females will also when given the opportunity mate with the dominant male which will increase the chances of the dominat 
male guarding his cubs with her gestation lasts between and days producing two to five cubs most often two or three 
during the rainy season novdec when termites are more active they are born with their eyes open but initially are 
helpless and weigh around grams oz the first six to eight weeks are spent in the den with their parents the male may 
spend up to six hours a night watching over the cubs while the mother is out looking for food after three months they 
begin supervised foraging and by four months are normally independent though they will often share a den with their 
mother until the next breeding season by the time the next set of cubs is born the older cubs have moved on aardwolves 
generally achieve sexual maturity at one and a half to two years of age conservation the aardwolf has not seen 
decreasing numbers and they are relatively widespread throughout eastern africa they are not common throughout their 
range as they maintain a density of no more than per square kilometer if the food is good because of these factors the 
iucn has rated the aardwolf as least concern in some areas they are persecuted by man because of the mistaken belief 
that they prey on livestock however they are actually beneficial to the farmers because they eat termites that are 
detrimental in other areas the farmers have recognized this but they are still killed on occasion for their fur dogs and 
insecticides are also common killers of the aardwolf interaction with humans aardwolfs are common sights at zoos 
frankfurt zoo in germany was home to the oldest recorded aardwolf in captivity at years and months notes footnotes 
references anderson m mills g proteles cristatus aardwolf in iucn iucn red list of threatened species retrieved march 
anon wildlife fact file group imp publishing ltd card isbn brottman mikita burt jonathon ed hyena animal london uk 
reaktion books pp isbn goodwin george g aardwolf in johnston bernard colliers encyclopedia i a to ameland st ed new york 
ny pf collier hoiberg dale h ed aardwolf encyclopdia britannica i aak bayes th ed chicago il encyclopdia britannica inc 
isbn koehler c e richardson p r k proteles cristatus mammalian species american society of mammalogists jstor koepfli 
klauspeter jenks susan m eizirik eduardo zahirpour tannaz van valkenburgh blaire wayne robert k molecular systematics of 
the hyaenidae relationships of a relictual lineage resolved by a molecular supermatrix pdf molecular phylogenetics and 
evolution doijympev issn pmid mills gus harvey martin african predators washington dc smithsonian institution press isbn 
nowak ronald m walkers carnivores of the world baltimore md the johns hopkins university press isbn oxford english 
dictionary online maanhaar oxford english dictionary retrieved apr richardson phillip k r bearder simon k the hyena 
family in macdonald david the encyclopedia of mammals new york ny facts on file publication isbn rieger ingo hyenas in 
parker sybil p grzimeks encyclopedia of mammals new york ny mcgrawhill publishing company isbn simpson j a weiner e s c 
eds aardwolf the oxford english dictionary i a bazouki nd ed oxford uk clarendon press isbn wozencraft w christopher 
order carnivora in wilson don e reeder deeann m mammal species of the world a taxonomic and geographic reference rd ed 
baltimore md johns hopkins university press isbn further reading skinner j d chimimba christian t the mammals of the 
southern african subregion rd ed cambridge university press isbn retrieved march external links animal diversity web 
iucn hyaenidae specialist group aardwolf pages on hyaenidaeorg texts on wikisource aardwolf encyclopdia britannica th ed 
aardwolf colliers new encyclopedia 