
abalone bloni or bloni via spanish abuln from the rumsen language auln is a common name for any of a group of small to 
very large edible sea snails marine gastropod molluscs in the family haliotidae other common names are ear shells sea 
ears and muttonfish or muttonshells in australia ormer in great britain and pua in new zealand the family haliotidae 
contains only one genus haliotis which used to contain subgenera these subgenera have become alternate representations 
of haliotis the number of species recognized worldwide ranges between and with over specieslevel taxa described the most 
comprehensive treatment of the family considers species valid with additional subspecies the shells of abalones have a 
low open spiral structure and are characterized by several open respiratory pores in a row near the shells outer edge 
the thick inner layer of the shell is composed of nacre motherofpearl which in many species is highly iridescent giving 
rise to a range of strong changeable colors which make the shells attractive to humans as decorative objects jewelry and 
as a source of colorful motherofpearl the flesh of abalones is widely considered to be a desirable food and is consumed 
raw or cooked in a variety of cultures description the shell of abalones is convex rounded to oval shape and may be 
highly arched or very flattened the shell of the majority of species is earshaped presenting a small flat spire and two 
to three whorls the last whorl known as the body whorl is auriform meaning that the shell resembles an ear giving rise 
to the common name ear shell haliotis asinina has a somewhat different shape as it is more elongated and distended the 
shell of haliotis cracherodii cracherodii is also unusual as it has an ovate form is imperforate shows an exserted spire 
and has prickly ribs a mantle cleft in the shell impresses a groove in the shell in which are the row of holes 
characteristic of the genus these holes are respiratory apertures for venting water from the gills and for releasing 
sperm and eggs into the water column they make up what is known as the selenizone which form as the shell grows this 
series of to holes is near the anterior margin only a small number are generally open the older holes are gradually 
sealed up as the shell grows and new holes form each species has a typical number of open holes between four and ten in 
the selenizone abalone have no operculum the aperture of the shell is very wide and nacreous the exterior of the shell 
is striated and dull the color of the shell is very variable from species to species which may reflect the animals diet 
the iridescent nacre that lines the inside of the shell varies in color from silvery white to pink red and greenred to 
deep blue green to purple the animal shows fimbriated headlobes the sidelobes are also fimbriated and cirrated the 
rounded foot is very large the radula has small median teeth and the lateral teeth are single and beamlike there are 
about uncini with denticulated hooks the first four very large the soft body is coiled around the columellar muscle and 
its insertion instead of being on the columella is on the middle of the inner wall of the shell the gills are 
symmetrical and both well developed these snails cling solidly with their broad muscular foot to rocky surfaces at 
sublittoral depths although some species such as haliotis cracherodii used to be common in the intertidal zone abalones 
reach maturity at a relatively small size their fecundity is high and increases with their size from to million eggs at 
a time the spermatozoa are filiform and pointed at one end and the anterior end is a rounded head the larvae are 
lecithotrophic the adults are herbivorous and feed with their rhipidoglossan radula on macroalgae preferring red or 
brown algae sizes vary from millimetres in haliotis pulcherrima to millimetres in while haliotis rufescens is the 
largest of the genus at inches cm abalones are herbivorous on hard substrata by weight approximately of the animal is 
edible meat is offal and is shell distribution the haliotid family has a worldwide distribution along the coastal waters 
of every continent except the pacific coast of south america the east coast of the united states the arctic and 
antarctica the majority of abalone species are found in cold waters such as off the coasts of new zealand south africa 
australia western north america and japan structure and properties of the shell the shell of the abalone is 
exceptionally strong and is made of microscopic calcium carbonate tiles stacked like bricks between the layers of tiles 
is a clingy protein substance when the abalone shell is struck the tiles slide instead of shattering and the protein 
stretches to absorb the energy of the blow material scientists around the world are studying this tiled structure for 
insight into stronger ceramic products such as body armor the dust created by grinding and cutting abalone shell is 
dangerous appropriate safeguards must be taken to protect people from inhaling these particles diseases and pests 
abalones are subject to various diseases the victorian department of primary industries said in that ganglioneuritis or 
avg killed up to of stock in affected regions abalone are also severe hemophiliacs as their fluids will not clot in the 
case of a laceration or puncture wound members of the spionidae family of the polychaetes are known as pests of abalone 
human use the meat foot muscle of abalone is used for food and the shells of abalone are used as decorative items and as 
a source of mother of pearl for jewelry buttons buckles and inlay abalone shells have been found in archaeological sites 
around the world ranging from year old deposits at blombos cave in south africa to historic chinese abalone middens on 
californias northern channel islands on the channel islands where abalones were harvested by native americans for at 
least years the size of red abalone shells found in middens declines significantly after about years ago probably due to 
human predation worldwide abalone pearls have also been collected for centuries farming farming of abalone began in the 
late s and early s in japan and china since the mids there have been many increasingly successful endeavors to 
commercially farm abalone for the purpose of consumption overfishing and poaching have reduced wild populations to such 
an extent that farmed abalone now supplies most of the abalone meat consumed the principal abalone farming regions are 
china taiwan japan and korea abalone is also farmed in australia canada chile france iceland ireland mexico namibia new 
zealand south africa thailand and the united states consumption abalone have long been a valuable food source for humans 
in every area of the world where a species is abundant the meat of this mollusc is considered a delicacy in certain 
parts of latin america especially chile france new zealand southeast asia and east asia especially in china vietnam 
japan and korea in chinese speaking regions abalone are commonly known as bao yu and sometimes form part of a chinese 
banquet in the same way as shark fin soup or birds nest soup abalone is considered a luxury item and is traditionally 
reserved for special occasions such as weddings and other celebrations however the availability of commercially farmed 
abalone has allowed more common consumption of this once rare delicacy abalone started to become popular after the 
panamapacific international exposition in as abalone became more popular and less common the prices have adjusted 
accordingly in the s a restaurant served portion of abalone about ounces would cost in inflation adjusted dollars about 
by the price had skyrocketed to in america prior to this time abalone was predominantly eaten gathered and prepared by 
chinese immigrants by laws were passed in california to outlaw the taking of abalone above the intertidal zone this 
forced the chinese out of the market and the japanese perfected diving with or without gear to enter the market by the 
time of the exposition americans were starting to discover the abalone the popularity of the abalone along with many 
other fish and shellfish increased as the expo exhibited varieties of fish with cooking demonstrations and a seat dining 
hall in japan live and raw abalone are used in awabi sushi or served steamed salted boiled chopped or simmered in soy 
sauce salted fermented abalone entrails are the main component of tottsuru a local dish from honsh tottsuru is mainly 
enjoyed with sake in california abalone meat can be found on pizza sauted with caramelized mango or in steak form dusted 
with cracker meal and flour sport harvesting australia tasmania supplies approximately of the yearly world abalone 
harvest around tasmanians recreationally fish for blacklip and greenlip abalone for blacklip abalone the size limit 
varies from between millimetres in for the southern end of the state and millimetres in for the northern end of the 
state greenlip abalone have a minimum size of millimetres in except for an area around perkins bay in the north of the 
state where the minimum size is millimetres in with a recreational abalone licence there is a bag limit of per day and a 
total possession limit of scuba diving for abalone is allowed and has a rich history in australia scuba diving for 
abalone in the states of new south wales and western australia is illegal a freediving catch limit of two is allowed 
victoria has had an active abalone fishery since the late s the state is sectioned into three fishing zones eastern 
central and western with each fisher required a zone allocated licence harvesting is performed by divers using surface 
supplied air hookah systems operating from runabout style outboard powered boats while the diver seeks out colonies of 
abalone amongst the reef beds the deckhand operates the boat known as working live and stays above where the diver is 
working bags of abalone pried from the rocks are brought to the surface by the diver or by way of shot line where the 
deckhand drops a weighted rope for the catch bag to be connected then retrieved divers measure each abalone before 
removing from the reef and the deckhand remeasures each abalone and removes excess weed growth from the shell since the 
victorian industry has seen a significant decline in catches with the total allowable catch tac reduced from tonnes to 
tonnes for the fishing year this is due to dwindling stocks and most notably the abalone virus ganglioneuritis which is 
fast spreading and lethal to abalone stocks united states sport harvesting of red abalone is permitted with a california 
fishing license and an abalone stamp card in the abalone card also came with a set of tags this was reduced to abalone 
per year in only nine of which may be taken south of mendocino county legalsize abalone must be tagged immediately 
abalone may only be taken using breathhold techniques or shorepicking scuba diving for abalone is strictly prohibited 
taking of abalone is not permitted south of the mouth of the san francisco bay there is a size minimum of inches mm 
measured across the shell a person may be in possession of only three abalone at any given time abalone may only be 
taken from april to november not including july transportation of abalone may only legally occur while the abalone is 
still attached in the shell sale of sportobtained abalone is illegal including the shell only red abalone may be taken 
as black white pink flat green and pinto abalone are protected by law an abalone diver is normally equipped with a thick 
wetsuit including a hood bootees and gloves and usually also a mask snorkel weight belt abalone iron and abalone gauge 
alternatively the rock picker can feel underneath rocks at low tides for abalone abalone are mostly taken in depths from 
a few inches up to metres ft less common are freedivers who can work deeper than metres ft abalone are normally found on 
rocks near food sources such as kelp an abalone iron is used to pry the abalone from the rock before it can fully clamp 
down divers dive out of boats kayaks tube floats or directly off the shore the largest abalone recorded in california is 
inches cm caught by john pepper somewhere off the coast of san mateo county in september the mollusc concholepas 
concholepas is often sold in the united states under the name chilean abalone though it is not an abalone but a muricid 
new zealand in new zealand abalone is called pua pa from the mori language haliotis iris or blackfoot pua is the 
ubiquitous new zealand pua the highly polished nacre of which is extremely popular as souvenirs with its striking blue 
green and purple iridescence haliotis australis and haliotis virginea are also found in new zealand waters but are less 
popular than h iris like all new zealand shellfish recreational harvesting of pua does not require a permit provided 
catch limits size restrictions and seasonal and local restrictions set by the ministry for primary industries mpi are 
followed the legal recreational daily limit is pua per diver with a minimum shell length of mm in for haliotis iris and 
mm in for haliotis australis in addition no person may be in possession even on land of more than pua or more than kg lb 
of pua meat at any one time pua can only be caught by freediving it is illegal to catch pua using scuba gear there is an 
extensive global black market in collecting and exporting abalone meat this can be a particularly awkward problem where 
the right to harvest pua can be granted legally under mori customary rights when such permits to harvest are abused it 
is frequently difficult to police the limit is strictly enforced by roving ministry for primary industries fishery 
officers with the backing of the new zealand police pua poaching is a major industry in new zealand with many thousands 
being taken illegally often undersized convictions have resulted in seizure of diving gear boats and motor vehicles and 
fines and in rare cases imprisonment the ministry of fisheries expects in the year nearly tons of pua will be poached 
with of that being undersized south africa the largest abalone in south africa haliotis midae occurs along approximately 
twothirds of the countrys coastline abalonediving has been a recreational activity for many years but stocks are 
currently being threatened by illegal commercial harvesting in south africa all persons harvesting this shellfish need 
permits that are issued annually and no abalone may be harvested using scuba gear for the last few years however no 
permits have been issued for collecting abalone but commercial harvesting still continues as does illegal collection by 
syndicates in because of widespread poaching of abalone the south african government listed abalone as an endangered 
species according to the cites section iii appendix which requests member governments to monitor the trade in this 
species this listing was removed from cites in june by the south african government and south african abalone is no 
longer subject to cites trade controls export permits are still required however the abalone meat from south africa is 
prohibited for sale in the country to help reduce poaching however much of the illegally harvested meat is sold in asian 
countries as of early the wholesale price for abalone meat was approximately us per kilogram there is an active trade in 
the shells which sell for more than us per metric tonne channel islands ormers haliotis tuberculata are considered a 
delicacy in the british channel islands as well as in adjacent areas of france and are pursued with great alacrity by 
the locals this has led to a dramatic depletion in numbers since the latter half of the th century and ormering is now 
strictly regulated in order to preserve stocks the gathering of ormers is now restricted to a number of ormering tides 
from january to april which occur on the full or new moon and two days following no ormers may be taken from the beach 
that are under millimetres in in shell length gatherers are not allowed to wear wetsuits or even put their heads 
underwater any breach of these laws is a criminal offense and can lead to fine of up to or six months in prison the 
demand for ormers is such that they led to the worlds first underwater arrest when mr kempthorneleigh of guernsey was 
arrested by a police officer in full diving gear when illegally diving for ormers decorative items the highly iridescent 
inner nacre layer of the shell of abalone has traditionally been used as a decorative item in jewelry buttons and as 
inlay in furniture and in musical instruments such as guitars etc abalone pearl jewelry is very popular in new zealand 
and australia in no minor part due to the marketing and farming efforts of pearl companies unlike the oriental natural 
the akoya pearl and the south sea and tahitian cultured pearls abalone pearls are not primarily judged by their 
roundness the inner shell of the abalone is an iridescent swirl of intense colours ranging from deep cobalt blue and 
peacock green to purples creams and pinks therefore each pearl natural or cultured will have its own unique collage of 
colours the shells of abalone are occasionally used in new age smudging ceremonies to catch falling ash they have also 
been used as incense burners threat of extinction abalones have been identified as one of the many classes of organism 
threatened with extinction due to overfishing acidification of oceans from anthropogenic carbon dioxide as reduced ph 
erodes their shells it is predicted that abalones will become extinct in the wild within years at current rates of 
carbon dioxide production species the number of species that are recognized within the genus haliotis has fluctuated 
over time and depends on the source that is consulted the number of recognized species range from to this list finds a 
compromise using the worms database plus some species that have been added for a total of the majority of abalone have 
not been rated for conservation status those that have been reviewed tend to show that the abalone in general is an 
animal that is declining in numbers and will need protection throughout the globe synonyms see also list of delicacies 
notes footnotes references external links chisholm hugh ed abalone encyclopdia britannica th ed cambridge university 
press abalone species diversity abmap the abalone mapping project abalone biology conchology hardys internet guide to 
marine gastropods shell catalog book on crafting with abalone shell fisheries western australia abalone fact sheet 
imagemap of worldwide abalone distribution omans abalone harvest pro abalone diver mallacoota victoria tathra nsw 
abalone additional reading field les lomawaima k tsianina ed abalone tales collaborative explorations of sovereignty and 
identity in native california durham nc duke university press isbn geiger daniel l poppe g t a conchological iconography 
the family haliotidae hackenheim germany conchbooks pollard graham abalone fishing in south australia south pacific 
underwater medicine society journal retrieved august menoita menoita