
abandoned pets are both exotic pets and companion animals that are either inadvertently or deliberately cast off by 
their owners this commonly occurs when an owner dies or when a pet becomes disruptive or grows too large the financial 
crisis of has resulted in a number of pets abandoned for economic reasons typical of this group are pets left behind 
when the owners home is foreclosed these animals can be left alone on the property or dropped off at an animal shelter 
they are often discovered after the foreclosure process when the realtor or bank enters the home animals lucky enough to 
survive until they are discovered are often in poor condition due to lack of resources such as food and water 
abandonment pets are abandoned for a variety of reasons often when abandoned pets are forced to fend for themselves and 
become feral in particular cats and dogs go to colonies feral cats are said to outnumber feral dogs feral cats are 
difficult to deal with as often they become impossible to socialize enough to be reintroduced to a new human owner in 
general only newly abandoned cats and very young feral kittens can be tamed foreclosure pets currently the exact number 
of foreclosure pets is unknown people often drop animals off at a shelter and claim they are moving when in fact they 
are leaving due to foreclosure however it is thought the numbers are climbing due to high foreclosure rates as 
homeowners run out of time and options they often leave their animals behind the animals are then classified as 
abandoned foreclosure pets the pets left behind in homes are often left without food or water some do not survive 
because of the lack of resources and are found dead when realtors or banks enter the premises the animals are put in 
harms way and it is often believed it is done as a way to retaliate against those who took the home away pets are not 
able to survive in the wild without resources which means they are at a disadvantage whenever they are left without 
humans to watch over them many are left to starve or become dehydrated shelters many animals left at a shelter are 
euthanized due to lack of space and financial resources for these animals shelters unable to raise additional funds to 
provide for the increased number of incoming animals have no choice but to euthanize them sometimes within days see also 
animal shelter animal euthanasia cat colony estray humane society of the united states overpopulation in companion 
animals peta spaying and neutering references richard rogers august animal welfare crisis unfolds in germany as refuges 
deluged the observer seidman susan m the pet surplus what every dog and cat owner can do to help reduce it s m seidman p 
isbn peters sharon l july foreclosures slam doors on pets too usatoday california p retrieved august nieves evelyn 
january foreclosures lead to abandoned animals foxnews california p retrieved august sullivan carole october 
foreclosures lead to rise in abandoned pets in cleveland wkyc cleveland p retrieved august lewis laura dawn laid off now 
what financial savvy book couples company inc p isbn bibliography in difficult times aspca urges families facing 
foreclosure please dont leave your pets behind press release aspca january retrieved august abandoned foreclosure pets 
press release foreclosuredeals july retrieved october external links chesley v morton v georgia department of 
agriculture and tommy irvin in his official capacity as commissioner haytap short movie do not abandon me 
campaign