
abdomen less formally called the belly stomach tummy or midriff constitutes the part of the body between the thorax 
chest and pelvis in humans and in other vertebrates such as mammals the region enclosed by the abdomen is termed the 
abdominal cavity in arthropods it is the posterior tagma of the body it follows the thorax or cephalothorax anatomically 
the abdomen stretches from the thorax at the thoracic diaphragm to the pelvis at the pelvic brim the pelvic brim 
stretches from the lumbosacral angle the intervertebral disk between l and s to the pubic symphysis and is the edge of 
the pelvic inlet the space above this inlet and under the thoracic diaphragm is termed the abdominal cavity the boundary 
of the abdominal cavity is the abdominal wall in the front and the peritoneal surface at the rear structure contents the 
abdomen contains most of the tubelike organs of the digestive tract as well as several solid organs hollow abdominal 
organs include the stomach the small intestine and the colon with its attached appendix organs such as the liver its 
attached gallbladder and the pancreas function in close association with the digestive tract and communicate with it via 
ducts the spleen kidneys and adrenal glands also lie within the abdomen along with many blood vessels including the 
aorta and inferior vena cava anatomists may consider the urinary bladder uterus fallopian tubes and ovaries as either 
abdominal organs or as pelvic organs finally the abdomen contains an extensive membrane called the peritoneum a fold of 
peritoneum may completely cover certain organs whereas it may cover only one side of organs that usually lie closer to 
the abdominal wall anatomists call the latter type of organs retroperitoneal digestive tract stomach small intestine 
large intestine with cecum and appendix accessory organs of the digestive tract liver gallbladder and pancreas urinary 
system kidneys and ureters but technically located in retroperitoneum outside peritoneal membrane other organs spleen 
abdominal organs can be highly specialized in some animals for example the stomach of ruminants a suborder of mammals is 
divided into four chambers rumen reticulum omasum and abomasum in vertebrates the abdomen is a large cavity enclosed by 
the abdominal muscles ventrally and laterally and by the vertebral column dorsally lower ribs can also enclose ventral 
and lateral walls the abdominal cavity is upper part of the pelvic cavity it is attached to the thoracic cavity by the 
diaphragm structures such as the aorta superior vena cava and esophagus pass through the diaphragm both the abdominal 
and pelvic cavities are lined by a serous membrane known as the parietal peritoneum this membrane is continuous with the 
visceral peritoneum lining the organs the abdomen in vertebrates contains a number of organs belonging for instance to 
the digestive tract and urinary system muscles there are three layers of the abdominal wall they are from the outside to 
the inside external oblique internal oblique and transverse abdominus the first three layers extend between the 
vertebral column the lower ribs the iliac crest and pubis of the hip all of their fibers merge towards the midline and 
surround the rectus abdominus in a sheath before joining up on the opposite side at the linea alba strength is gained by 
the crisscrossing of fibers such that the external oblique are downward and forward the internal oblique upward and 
forward and the transverse abdominus horizontally forward the transversus abdominis muscle is flat and triangular with 
its fibers running horizontally it lies between the inner oblique and the underlying transversalis fascia it originates 
from pouparts ligament the inner lip of the ilium the lumbar fascia and the inner surface of the cartilages of the six 
lower ribs it inserts into the linea alba behind the rectus abdominis the rectus abdominis muscles are long and flat the 
muscle is crossed by three tendinous intersections called the linae transversae the rectus abdominis is enclosed in a 
thick sheath formed as described above by fibers from each of the three muscles of the lateral abdominal wall they 
originate at the pubis bone run up the abdomen on either side of the linea alba and insert into the cartilages of the 
fifth sixth and seventh ribs in the region of the groin the inguinal canal a passage through the layers this gap is 
where the testes can drop through the wall and where the fibrous cord from the uterus in the female runs this is also 
where weakness can form and inguinal hernias the pyramidalis muscle is small and triangular it is located in the lower 
abdomen in front of the rectus abdominis it originates at the pubic bone and is inserted into the linea alba halfway up 
to the umbilicus function functionally the human abdomen is where most of the alimentary tract is placed and so most of 
the absorption and digestion of food occurs here the alimentary tract in the abdomen consists of the lower esophagus the 
stomach the duodenum the jejunum ileum the cecum and the appendix the ascending transverse and descending colons the 
sigmoid colon and the rectum other vital organs inside the abdomen include the liver the kidneys the pancreas and the 
spleen the abdominal wall is split into the posterior back lateral sides and anterior front walls movement breathing and 
other functions the abdominal muscles have different important functions they assist in the breathing process moreover 
these muscles serve as protection for the inner organs furthermore together with the back muscles they provide postural 
support and are important in defining the form when the glottis is closed and the thorax and pelvis are fixed they are 
integral in the cough urination defecation childbirth vomit and singing functions when the pelvis is fixed they can 
initiate the movement of the trunk in a forward motion they also prevent hyperextension when the thorax is fixed they 
can pull up the pelvis and finally they can bend the vertebral column sideways and assist in the trunks rotation posture 
the transverse abdominus muscle is the deepest muscle therefore it cannot be touched from the outside it can greatly 
affect the body posture the internal obliques are also deep and also affect body posture both of them are involved in 
rotation and lateral flexion of the spine and are used to bend and support the spine from the front the external 
obliques are more superficial and they are also involved in rotation and lateral flexion of the spine also they 
stabilize the spine when upright the rectus abdominus muscle is not the most superficial abdominal muscle the tendonous 
sheath extending from the external obliques cover the rectus abdominus the rectus abdominus is the muscle that very fit 
people develop into the pack ab look although it should really be an pack as there are vertical sections on each side 
the bottom sections are just above the pubic bone and usually not visible hence the pack abs the rectus abdominals 
function is to bend ones back forward flexion the main work of the abdominal muscles is to bend the spine forward when 
contracting coencentrically society and culture exercise being a key element to support the spine and contribute to a 
good posture it is important to properly exercise the abdominal muscles together with the back muscles as when weak or 
overly tight they can suffer painful spasms as well as injuries when properly exercised these muscles contribute to 
improve posture and balance reduce the likelihood of back pain episodes reduce the severity of back pain protect against 
injury by responding efficiently to stresses help avoid some back surgeries and help healing from a back problem or 
after spine surgery also when strengthened the abdominal muscles provide flexibility as well the abdominal muscles can 
be worked out by practicing disciplines of general body strength such as pilates yoga tai chi and jogging among others 
there are also specific routines to target each of these muscles clinical significance disease examination terminology a 
scaphoid abdomen is when the abdomen is sucked inwards in a newborn it may represent a diaphragmatic hernia in general 
it is indicative of malnutrition surface landmarks in the midline a slight furrow extends from the ensiform 
cartilagexiphoid process above to the pubic symphysis below representing the linea alba in the abdominal wall at about 
its midpoint sits the umbilicus or navel on each side of it the broad recti muscles stand out in muscular people the 
outline of these muscles is interrupted by three or more transverse depressions indicating the lineae transversae there 
is usually one about the ensiform cartilage one at the umbilicus and one between it is the combination of the linea alba 
and the linea transversae which form the abdominal sixpack sought after by many people the upper lateral limit of the 
abdomen is the subcostal margin at or near the subcostal plane formed by the cartilages of the false ribs joining one 
another the lower lateral limit is the anterior crest of the ilium and pouparts ligament which runs from the anterior 
superior spine of the ilium to the spine of the pubis these lower limits are marked by visible grooves just above the 
pubic spines on either side are the external abdominal rings which are openings in the muscular wall of the abdomen 
through which the spermatic cord emerges in the male and through which an inguinal hernia may rupture one method by 
which the location of the abdominal contents can be appreciated is to draw three horizontal and two vertical lines 
horizontal lines the highest of the former is the transpyloric line of c addison which is situated halfway between the 
suprasternal notch and the top of the pubic symphysis and often cuts the pyloric opening of the stomach an inch to the 
right of the midline the hilum of each kidney is a little below it while its left end approximately touches the lower 
limit of the spleen it corresponds to the first lumbar vertebra behind the second line is the subcostal line drawn from 
the lowest point of the subcostal arch tenth rib it corresponds to the upper part of the third lumbar vertebra and it is 
an inch or so above the umbilicus it indicates roughly the transverse colon the lower ends of the kidneys and the upper 
limit of the transverse rd part of the duodenum the third line is called the intertubercular line and runs across 
between the two rough tubercles which can be felt on the outer lip of the crest of the ilium about two and a half inches 
mm from the anterior superior spine this line corresponds to the body of the fifth lumbar vertebra and passes through or 
just above the ileocaecal valve where the small intestine joins the large vertical lines the two vertical or midpoupart 
lines are drawn from the point midway between the anterior superior spine and the pubic symphysis on each side 
vertically upward to the costal margin the right one is the most valuable as the ileocaecal valve is situated where it 
cuts the intertubercular line the orifice of the vermiform appendix lies an inch lower at mcburneys point in its upper 
part the vertical line meets the transpyloric line at the lower margin of the ribs usually the ninth and here the 
gallbladder is situated the left midpoupart line corresponds in its upper threequarters to the inner edge of the 
descending colon the right subcostal margin corresponds to the lower limit of the liver while the right nipple is about 
half an inch above the upper limit of this viscus regions region scheme these three horizontal and two vertical lines 
divide the abdomen into nine regions note that hypo means below and epi means above while chond means cartilage in this 
case the cartilage of the rib and gast means stomach the reversal of left and right is intentional because the 
anatomical designations reflect the position on the patient region scheme another way of dividing the abdomen is by 
using quadrants other animals the invertebrate abdomen is built up of a series of upper plates known as tergites and 
lower plates known as sternites the whole being held together by a tough yet stretchable membrane the abdomen contains 
the insects digestive tract and reproductive organs it consists of eleven segments in most orders of insects though the 
eleventh segment is absent in the adult of most higher orders the number of these segments does vary from species to 
species with the number of segments visible reduced to only seven in the common honeybee in the collembola springtails 
the abdomen has only six segments the abdomen is sometimes highly modified in apocrita bees ants and wasps the first 
segment of the abdomen is fused to the thorax and is called the propodeum in ants the second segment forms the narrow 
petiole some ants have an additional postpetiole segment and the remaining segments form the bulbous gaster the petiole 
and gaster abdominal segments and onward are collectively called the metasoma unlike other arthropods insects possess no 
legs on the abdomen in adult form though the protura do have rudimentary leglike appendages on the first three abdominal 
segments and archaeognatha possess small articulated styli which are sometimes considered to be rudimentary appendages 
many larval insects including the lepidoptera and the symphyta sawflies have fleshy appendages called prolegs on their 
abdominal segments as well as their more familiar thoracic legs which allow them to grip onto the edges of plant leaves 
as they walk around in arachnids spiders scorpions and relatives the term abdomen is used interchangeably with 
opisthosoma hind body which is the body section posterior to that bearing the legs and head the prosoma or cephalothorax 
see also this article uses anatomical terminology for an overview see anatomical terminology abdominal fat abdominal 
trauma abdominal wall references external links abdomen colliers new encyclopedia 