abortion is the ending of pregnancy by the removal or forcing out from the womb of a fetus or embryo before it is able 
to survive on its own an abortion can occur spontaneously in which case it is often called a miscarriage it can also be 
purposely caused in which case it is known as an induced abortion the term abortion most commonly refers to the induced 
abortion of a human pregnancy the similar procedure after the fetus may be able to survive on its own is medically known 
as a late termination of pregnancy modern medicine uses medications or surgical methods for induced abortion the two 
medications mifepristone and prostaglandin are as effective as a surgical method in the first trimester while the use of 
medications may be effective in the second trimester surgical methods appear to have a lower risk of side effects birth 
control including the pill and intrauterine devices can be started immediately after an abortion abortion in the 
developed world has a long history of being among the safest procedures in medicine when allowed by local law 
uncomplicated abortions do not cause either long term mental health or physical problems the world health organization 
recommends that this same level of safe and legal abortions be available to all women globally unsafe abortions however 
result in approximately maternal deaths and million hospital admissions per year globally the average cost of a first 
trimester abortion is an estimated million abortions are performed globally each year with slightly under half of those 
performed unsafely rates of abortions have changed little between and after having previously spent decades declining as 
access to education regarding family planning and birth control improved as of forty percent of the worlds women had 
access to legal induced abortions without restriction as to reason there are however limits regarding how far along in 
pregnant they can be performed induced abortion has a long history they have been performed by various methods including 
herbal medicines the use of sharpened tools physical trauma and other traditional methods since ancient times the laws 
surrounding abortion how frequently they are performed and their cultural and religious status vary a great deal around 
the world in some contexts abortion is legal based on specific conditions such as incest rape problems with the fetus 
socioeconomic factors or the risk to a mothers health in many parts of the world there is prominent public controversy 
over the moral ethical and legal issues of abortion those who are against abortion generally state that an embryo or 
fetus is a human with the right to life and may compare abortion to murder those who support abortion rights emphasize a 
womans right to decide matters concerning her own body as well as emphasizing human rights generally types induced 
approximately million pregnancies occur each year worldwide over a third are unintended and about a fifth end in induced 
abortion most abortions result from unintended pregnancies in the united kingdom to of abortions are done due to genetic 
problems in the fetus a pregnancy can be intentionally aborted in several ways the manner selected often depends upon 
the gestational age of the embryo or fetus which increases in size as the pregnancy progresses specific procedures may 
also be selected due to legality regional availability and doctor or patient preference reasons for procuring induced 
abortions are typically characterized as either therapeutic or elective an abortion is medically referred to as a 
therapeutic abortion when it is performed to save the life of the pregnant woman prevent harm to the womans physical or 
mental health terminate a pregnancy where indications are that the child will have a significantly increased chance of 
premature morbidity or mortality or be otherwise disabled or to selectively reduce the number of fetuses to lessen 
health risks associated with multiple pregnancy an abortion is referred to as an elective or voluntary abortion when it 
is performed at the request of the woman for nonmedical reasons confusion sometimes arises over the term elective 
because elective surgery generally refers to all scheduled surgery whether medically necessary or not spontaneous 
spontaneous abortion also known as miscarriage is the unintentional expulsion of an embryo or fetus before the th week 
of gestation a pregnancy that ends before weeks of gestation resulting in a liveborn infant is known as a premature 
birth or a preterm birth when a fetus dies in utero after viability or during delivery it is usually termed stillborn 
premature births and stillbirths are generally not considered to be miscarriages although usage of these terms can 
sometimes overlap only to of conceptions progress past the first trimester the vast majority of those that do not 
progress are lost before the woman is aware of the conception and many pregnancies are lost before medical practitioners 
can detect an embryo between and of known pregnancies end in clinically apparent miscarriage depending upon the age and 
health of the pregnant woman of these spontaneous abortions happen in the first trimester the most common cause of 
spontaneous abortion during the first trimester is chromosomal abnormalities of the embryo or fetus accounting for at 
least of sampled early pregnancy losses other causes include vascular disease such as lupus diabetes other hormonal 
problems infection and abnormalities of the uterus advancing maternal age and a patient history of previous spontaneous 
abortions are the two leading factors associated with a greater risk of spontaneous abortion a spontaneous abortion can 
also be caused by accidental trauma intentional trauma or stress to cause miscarriage is considered induced abortion or 
feticide methods medical medical abortions are those induced by abortifacient pharmaceuticals medical abortion became an 
alternative method of abortion with the availability of prostaglandin analogs in the s and the antiprogestogen 
mifepristone in the s the most common early firsttrimester medical abortion regimens use mifepristone in combination 
with a prostaglandin analog misoprostol or gemeprost up to weeks gestational age methotrexate in combination with a 
prostaglandin analog up to weeks gestation or a prostaglandin analog alone mifepristonemisoprostol combination regimens 
work faster and are more effective at later gestational ages than methotrexatemisoprostol combination regimens and 
combination regimens are more effective than misoprostol alone this regime is effective in the second trimester in very 
early abortions up to weeks gestation medical abortion using a mifepristonemisoprostol combination regimen is considered 
to be more effective than surgical abortion vacuum aspiration especially when clinical practice does not include 
detailed inspection of aspirated tissue early medical abortion regimens using mifepristone followed hours later by 
buccal or vaginal misoprostol are effective up to weeks gestational age if medical abortion fails surgical abortion must 
be used to complete the procedure early medical abortions account for the majority of abortions before weeks gestation 
in britain france switzerland and the nordic countries in the united states the percentage of early medical abortions is 
far lower medical abortion regimens using mifepristone in combination with a prostaglandin analog are the most common 
methods used for secondtrimester abortions in canada most of europe china and india in contrast to the united states 
where of secondtrimester abortions are performed surgically by dilation and evacuation surgical up to weeks gestation 
suctionaspiration or vacuum aspiration are the most common surgical methods of induced abortion manual vacuum aspiration 
mva consists of removing the fetus or embryo placenta and membranes by suction using a manual syringe while electric 
vacuum aspiration eva uses an electric pump these techniques differ in the mechanism used to apply suction in how early 
in pregnancy they can be used and in whether cervical dilation is necessary mva also known as minisuction and menstrual 
extraction can be used in very early pregnancy and does not require cervical dilation dilation and curettage dc the 
second most common method of surgical abortion is a standard gynecological procedure performed for a variety of reasons 
including examination of the uterine lining for possible malignancy investigation of abnormal bleeding and abortion 
curettage refers to cleaning the walls of the uterus with a curette the world health organization recommends this 
procedure also called sharp curettage only when mva is unavailable from the th week of gestation until approximately the 
th other techniques must be used dilation and evacuation de consists of opening the cervix of the uterus and emptying it 
using surgical instruments and suction premature labor and delivery can be induced with prostaglandin this can be 
coupled with injecting the amniotic fluid with hypertonic solutions containing saline or urea after the th week of 
gestation abortions can also be induced by intact dilation and extraction idx also called intrauterine cranial 
decompression which requires surgical decompression of the fetuss head before evacuation idx is sometimes called 
partialbirth abortion which has been federally banned in the united states in the third trimester of pregnancy abortion 
may be performed by idx as described above induction of labor or by hysterotomy hysterotomy abortion is a procedure 
similar to a caesarean section and is performed under general anesthesia it requires a smaller incision than a caesarean 
section and is used during later stages of pregnancy firsttrimester procedures can generally be performed using local 
anesthesia while secondtrimester methods may require deep sedation or general anesthesia other methods historically a 
number of herbs reputed to possess abortifacient properties have been used in folk medicine tansy pennyroyal black 
cohosh and the nowextinct silphium see history of abortion the use of herbs in such a manner can cause seriouseven 
lethalside effects such as multiple organ failure and is not recommended by physicians abortion is sometimes attempted 
by causing trauma to the abdomen the degree of force if severe can cause serious internal injuries without necessarily 
succeeding in inducing miscarriage in southeast asia there is an ancient tradition of attempting abortion through 
forceful abdominal massage one of the bas reliefs decorating the temple of angkor wat in cambodia depicts a demon 
performing such an abortion upon a woman who has been sent to the underworld reported methods of unsafe selfinduced 
abortion include misuse of misoprostol and insertion of nonsurgical implements such as knitting needles and clothes 
hangers into the uterus these methods are rarely seen in developed countries where surgical abortion is legal and 
available safety the health risks of abortion depend on whether the procedure is performed safely or unsafely the world 
health organization defines unsafe abortions as those performed by unskilled individuals with hazardous equipment or in 
unsanitary facilities legal abortions performed in the developed world are among the safest procedures in medicine in 
the us the risk of maternal death from abortion is per procedures making abortion about times safer for women than 
childbirth maternal deaths per live births this is equivalent to the risk of death from driving about km miles the risk 
of abortionrelated mortality increases with gestational age but remains lower than that of childbirth through at least 
weeks gestation vacuum aspiration in the first trimester is the safest method of surgical abortion and can be performed 
in a primary care office abortion clinic or hospital complications are rare and can include uterine perforation pelvic 
infection and retained products of conception requiring a second procedure to evacuate preventive antibiotics such as 
doxycycline or metronidazole are typically given before elective abortion as they are believed to substantially reduce 
the risk of postoperative uterine infection complications after secondtrimester abortion are similar to those after 
firsttrimester abortion and depend somewhat on the method chosen there is little difference in terms of safety and 
efficacy between medical abortion using a combined regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol and surgical abortion vacuum 
aspiration in early first trimester abortions up to weeks gestation medical abortion using the prostaglandin analog 
misoprostol alone is less effective and more painful than medical abortion using a combined regimen of mifepristone and 
misoprostol or surgical abortion some purported risks of abortion are promoted primarily by antiabortion groups but lack 
scientific support for example the question of a link between induced abortion and breast cancer has been investigated 
extensively major medical and scientific bodies including the world health organization the us national cancer institute 
the american cancer society the royal college of obstetricians and gynaecologists and the american congress of 
obstetricians and gynecologists have concluded that abortion does not cause breast cancer although such a link continues 
to be promoted by antiabortion groups similarly evidence indicates that induced abortion does not cause mentalhealth 
problems the american psychological association has concluded that a single abortion is not a threat to womens mental 
health and that women are no more likely to have mentalhealth problems after a firsttrimester abortion than after 
carrying an unwanted pregnancy to term abortions performed after the first trimester because of fetal abnormalities are 
not thought to cause mentalhealth problems some proposed negative psychological effects of abortion have been referred 
to by antiabortion advocates as a separate condition called postabortion syndrome which is not recognized by any medical 
or psychological organization unsafe abortion women seeking to terminate their pregnancies sometimes resort to unsafe 
methods particularly when access to legal abortion is restricted they may attempt to selfabort or rely on another person 
who does not have proper medical training or access to proper facilities this has a tendency to lead to severe 
complications such as incomplete abortion sepsis hemorrhage and damage to internal organs unsafe abortions are a major 
cause of injury and death among women worldwide although data are imprecise it is estimated that approximately million 
unsafe abortions are performed annually with taking place in developing countries unsafe abortions are believed to 
result in millions of injuries estimates of deaths vary according to methodology and have ranged from to in the past 
decade deaths from unsafe abortion account for around of all maternal deaths the world health organization believes that 
mortality has fallen since the s to reduce the number of unsafe abortions public health organizations have generally 
advocated emphasizing the legalization of abortion training of medical personnel and ensuring access to 
reproductivehealth services the legality of abortion is one of the main determinants of its safety countries with 
restrictive abortion laws have significantly higher rates of unsafe abortion and similar overall abortion rates compared 
to those where abortion is legal and available for example the legalization of abortion in south africa had an immediate 
positive impact on the frequency of abortionrelated complications with abortionrelated deaths dropping by more than in 
addition a lack of access to effective contraception contributes to unsafe abortion it has been estimated that the 
incidence of unsafe abortion could be reduced by up to from million to million annually if modern family planning and 
maternal health services were readily available globally forty percent of the worlds women are able to access 
therapeutic and elective abortions within gestational limits while an additional percent have access to legal abortion 
if they meet certain physical mental or socioeconomic criteria while maternal mortality seldom results from safe 
abortions unsafe abortions result in deaths and million disabilities per year complications of unsafe abortion account 
for approximately an eighth of maternal mortalities worldwide though this varies by region secondary infertility caused 
by an unsafe abortion affects an estimated million women the rate of unsafe abortions has increased from to between and 
health education access to family planning and improvements in health care during and after abortion have been proposed 
to address this phenomenon incidence there are two commonly used methods of measuring the incidence of abortion abortion 
rate number of abortions per women between and years of age abortion percentage number of abortions out of known 
pregnancies pregnancies include live births abortions and miscarriages the number of abortions performed worldwide has 
remained stable in recent years with million having been performed in and million having been performed in the abortion 
rate worldwide was per women though it was per women for developed countries and per women for developing countries the 
same study indicated that in the estimated abortion percentage of known pregnancies was at worldwide with in developed 
countries and in developing countries on average the incidence of abortion is similar in countries with restrictive 
abortion laws and those with more liberal access to abortion however restrictive abortion laws are associated with 
increases in the percentage of abortions which are performed unsafely the unsafe abortion rate in developing countries 
is partly attributable to lack of access to modern contraceptives according to the guttmacher institute providing access 
to contraceptives would result in about million fewer unsafe abortions and fewer deaths from unsafe abortion annually 
worldwide the rate of legal induced abortion varies extensively worldwide according to the report of employees of 
guttmacher institute it ranged from per women germany and switzerland to per women estonia in countries with complete 
statistics in the proportion of pregnancies that ended in induced abortion ranged from about israel the neatherlands and 
switzerland to estonia in the same group though it might be as high as in hungary and romania whose statistics were 
deemed incomplete the abortion rate may also be expressed as the average number of abortions a woman has during her 
reproductive years this is referred to as total abortion rate tar gestational age and method abortion rates also vary 
depending on the stage of pregnancy and the method practiced in the centers for disease control and prevention cdc 
reported that of abortions in the united states were known to have been obtained at less than weeks gestation at weeks 
at weeks at through weeks at through weeks at through weeks at through weeks and at more than weeks of these were 
classified as having been done by curettage suctionaspiration dilation and curettage dilation and evacuation by medical 
means mifepristone by intrauterine instillation saline or prostaglandin and by other including hysterotomy and 
hysterectomy according to the cdc due to data collection difficulties the data must be viewed as tentative and some 
fetal deaths reported beyond weeks may be natural deaths erroneously classified as abortions if the removal of the fetus 
is accomplished by the same procedure as an induced abortion the guttmacher institute estimated there were intact 
dilation and extraction procedures in the us during this accounts for of the total number of abortions performed that 
year similarly in england and wales in of terminations occurred at or under weeks between to weeks and at or over weeks 
of those reported were by vacuum aspiration by de and were medical there are more second trimester abortions in 
developing countries such as china india and vietnam than in developed countries motivation personal the reasons why 
women have abortions are diverse and vary across the world some of the most common reasons are to postpone childbearing 
to a more suitable time or to focus energies and resources on existing children others include being unable to afford a 
child either in terms of the direct costs of raising a child or the loss of income while she is caring for the child 
lack of support from the father inability to afford additional children desire to provide schooling for existing 
children disruption of ones own education relationship problems with their partner a perception of being too young to 
have a child unemployment and not being willing to raise a child conceived as a result of rape or incest among others 
societal some abortions are undergone as the result of societal pressures these might include the preference for 
children of a specific sex or race disapproval of single or early motherhood stigmatization of people with disabilities 
insufficient economic support for families lack of access to or rejection of contraceptive methods or efforts toward 
population control such as chinas onechild policy these factors can sometimes result in compulsory abortion or 
sexselective abortion an american study in concluded that about half of women having abortions were using a form of 
contraception at the time of becoming pregnant inconsistent use was reported by half of those using condoms and 
threequarters of those using the birthcontrol pill of those using condoms reported failure through slipping or breakage 
the guttmacher institute estimated that most abortions in the united states are obtained by minority women because 
minority women have much higher rates of unintended pregnancy maternal and fetal health an additional factor is risk to 
maternal or fetal health which was cited as the primary reason for abortion in over a third of cases in some countries 
and as a significant factor in only a singledigit percentage of abortions in other countries in the us the supreme court 
decisions in roe vs wade and doe vs bolton ruled that the states interest in the life of the fetus became compelling 
only at the point of viability defined as the point at which the fetus can survive independently of its mother even 
after the point of viability the state cannot favor the life of the fetus over the life or health of the pregnant woman 
under the right of privacy physicians must be free to use their medical judgment for the preservation of the life or 
health of the mother on the same day that the court decided roe it also decided doe v bolton in which the court defined 
health very broadly the medical judgment may be exercised in the light of all factorsphysical emotional psychological 
familial and the womans agerelevant to the wellbeing of the patient all these factors may relate to health this allows 
the attending physician the room he needs to make his best medical judgment public opinion shifted in america following 
television personality sherri finkbines discovery during her fifth month of pregnancy that she had been exposed to 
thalidomide unable to abort in the united states she traveled to sweden from there was an outbreak of german measles 
that left babies with severe birth defects in the american medical association publicly supported liberalization of 
abortion laws a national opinion research center poll in showed supported abortion when the mothers life was at risk 
when birth defects were present and for pregnancies resulting from rape or incest cancer the rate of cancer during 
pregnancy is and in many cases cancer of the mother leads to consideration of abortion to protect the life of the mother 
or in response to the potential damage that may occur to the fetus during treatment this is particularly true for 
cervical cancer the most common type which occurs in of every pregnancies for which initiation of treatment cannot 
coexist with preservation of fetal life unless neoadjuvant chemotherapy is chosen very early stage cervical cancers i 
and iia may be treated by radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection radiation therapy or both while later 
stages are treated by radiotherapy chemotherapy may be used simultaneously treatment of breast cancer during pregnancy 
also involves fetal considerations because lumpectomy is discouraged in favor of modified radical mastectomy unless 
lateterm pregnancy allows followup radiation therapy to be administered after the birth exposure to a single 
chemotherapy drug is estimated to cause a risk of teratogenic effects on the fetus with higher risks for multiple drug 
treatments treatment with more than gy of radiation usually causes spontaneous abortion exposure to much lower doses 
during the first trimester especially to weeks of development can cause intellectual disability or microcephaly and 
exposure at this or subsequent stages can cause reduced intrauterine growth and birth weight exposures above gy cause a 
dosedependent reduction in iq it is possible to greatly reduce exposure to radiation with abdominal shielding depending 
on how far the area to be irradiated is from the fetus the process of birth itself may also put the mother at risk 
vaginal delivery may result in dissemination of neoplastic cells into lymphovascular channels haemorrhage cervical 
laceration and implantation of malignant cells in the episiotomy site while abdominal delivery may delay the initiation 
of nonsurgical treatment history induced abortion has long history and can be traced back to civilizations as varied as 
china under shennong c bce ancient egypt with its ebers papyrus c bce and the roman empire in the time of juvenal c ce 
there is evidence to suggest that pregnancies were terminated through a number of methods including the administration 
of abortifacient herbs the use of sharpened implements the application of abdominal pressure and other techniques one of 
the earliest known artistic representations of abortion is in a bas relief at angkor wat c found in a series of friezes 
that represent judgment after death in hindu and buddhist culture it depicts the technique of abdominal abortion some 
medical scholars and abortion opponents have suggested that the hippocratic oath forbade ancient greek physicians from 
performing abortions other scholars disagree with this interpretation and note the medical texts of hippocratic corpus 
contain descriptions of abortive techniques aristotle in his treatise on government politics bce condemns infanticide as 
a means of population control he preferred abortion in such cases with the restriction that it must be practised on it 
before it has developed sensation and life for the line between lawful and unlawful abortion will be marked by the fact 
of having sensation and being alive in christianity pope sixtus v is noted as the first pope to declare that abortion is 
homicide regardless of the stage of pregnancy the catholic church had previously been divided on whether it believed 
that abortion was murder and did not begin vigorously opposing abortion until the th century islamic tradition has 
traditionally permitted abortion until a point in time when muslims believe the soul enters the fetus considered by 
various theologians to be at conception days after conception days after conception or quickening however abortion is 
largely heavily restricted or forbidden in areas of high islamic faith such as the middle east and north africa in 
europe and north america abortion techniques advanced starting in the th century however conservatism by most physicians 
with regards to sexual matters prevented the wide expansion of safe abortion techniques other medical practitioners in 
addition to some physicians advertised their services and they were not widely regulated until the th century when the 
practice was banned in both the united states and the united kingdom church groups as well as physicians were highly 
influential in antiabortion movements in the us abortion was more dangerous than childbirth until about when incremental 
improvements in abortion procedures relative to childbirth made abortion safer the soviet union iceland and sweden were 
among the first countries to legalize certain or all forms of abortion in nazi germany a law was passed permitting 
abortions for those deemed hereditarily ill while women considered of german stock were specifically prohibited from 
having abortions beginning in the second half of the twentieth century abortion was legalized in a greater number of 
countries new york was the first state in the usa to legalize abortion on demand a bill passed by the state legislature 
legalizing abortion on demand was signed by governor nelson rockefeller in april society and culture abortion debate 
induced abortion has long been the source of considerable debate controversy and activism an individuals position 
concerning the complex ethical moral philosophical biological and legal issues which surround abortion is often related 
to his or her value system opinions of abortion may be described as being a combination of beliefs about abortions 
morality beliefs about the proper extent of governmental authority in public policy and beliefs about the rights and 
responsibilities of the woman seeking to have an abortion religious ethics also has an influence both on personal 
opinion and on the greater debate over abortion in both public and private debate arguments presented in favor of or 
against abortion access focus on either the moral permissibility of an induced abortion or justification of laws 
permitting or restricting abortion abortion debates especially pertaining to abortion laws are often spearheaded by 
groups advocating one of these two positions antiabortion groups who favor greater legal restrictions on abortion 
including complete prohibition most often describe themselves as prolife while abortion rights groups who are against 
such legal restrictions describe themselves as prochoice generally the former position argues that a human fetus is a 
human being with a right to live making abortion morally the same as murder the latter position argues that a woman has 
certain reproductive rights especially the choice whether or not to carry a pregnancy to term abortionrights movements 
abortionrights movements advocate for legal access to induced abortion services the issue of induced abortion remains 
divisive in public life with recurring arguments to liberalize or to restrict access to legal abortion services 
abortionrights supporters themselves are frequently divided as to the types of abortion services that should be 
available and to the circumstances for example different periods in the pregnancy such as late term abortions in which 
access may be restricted modern abortion law current laws pertaining to abortion are diverse religious moral and 
cultural sensibilities continue to influence abortion laws throughout the world the right to life the right to liberty 
the right to security of person and the right to reproductive health are major issues of human rights that are sometimes 
used as justification for the existence or absence of laws controlling abortion in jurisdictions where abortion is legal 
certain requirements must often be met before a woman may obtain a safe legal abortion an abortion performed without the 
womans consent is considered feticide these requirements usually depend on the age of the fetus often using a 
trimesterbased system to regulate the window of legality some jurisdictions require a waiting period before the 
procedure prescribe the distribution of information on fetal development or require that parents be contacted if their 
minor daughter requests an abortion other jurisdictions may require that a woman obtain the consent of the fetus father 
before aborting the fetus that abortion providers inform patients of health risks of the proceduresometimes including 
risks not supported by the medical literatureand that multiple medical authorities certify that the abortion is either 
medically or socially necessary many restrictions are waived in emergency situations china which has a onechild policy 
has at times incorporated mandatory abortions as part of their population control strategy other jurisdictions ban 
abortion almost entirely many but not all of these allow legal abortions in a variety of circumstances these 
circumstances vary based on jurisdiction but may include whether the pregnancy is a result of rape or incest the fetus 
development is impaired the womans physical or mental wellbeing is endangered or socioeconomic considerations make 
childbirth a hardship in countries where abortion is banned entirely such as nicaragua medical authorities have recorded 
rises in maternal death directly and indirectly due to pregnancy as well as deaths due to doctors fears of prosecution 
if they treat other gynecological emergencies some countries such as bangladesh that nominally ban abortion may also 
support clinics that perform abortions under the guise of menstrual hygiene this is also a terminology in traditional 
medicine in places where abortion is illegal or carries heavy social stigma pregnant women may engage in medical tourism 
and travel to countries where they can terminate their pregnancies women without the means to travel can resort to 
providers of illegal abortions or attempt to perform an abortion by themselves emergency contraception is generally 
available in countries that have not restricted abortion and is also sometimes available in countries that have 
otherwise banned abortion such as chile this has caused controversy as some antiabortion groups assert that certain 
forms of emergency contraception are not contraceptives but abortifacients see eg abortion in the dominican republic 
sexselective abortion sonography and amniocentesis allow parents to determine sex before childbirth the development of 
this technology has led to sexselective abortion or the termination of a fetus based on sex the selective termination of 
a female fetus is most common sexselective abortion is partially responsible for the noticeable disparities between the 
birth rates of male and female children in some countries the preference for male children is reported in many areas of 
asia and abortion used to limit female births has been reported in taiwan south korea india and china this deviation 
from the standard birth rates of males and females occurs despite the fact that the country in question may have 
officially banned sexselective abortion or even sexscreening in china a historical preference for a male child has been 
exacerbated by the onechild policy which was enacted in many countries have taken legislative steps to reduce the 
incidence of sexselective abortion at the international conference on population and development in over states agreed 
to eliminate all forms of discrimination against the girl child and the root causes of son preference which was also 
condemned by a pace resolution in the world health organization and unicef along with other united nations agencies have 
found that measures to reduce access to abortion are much less effective at reducing sexselective abortions than 
measures to reduce gender inequality antiabortion violence in a number of cases abortion providers and these facilities 
have been subjected to various forms of violence including murder attempted murder kidnapping stalking assault arson and 
bombing antiabortion violence is classified by both governmental and scholarly sources as terrorism only a small 
fraction of those opposed to abortion commit violence often rationalizing their actions as justifiable homicide or 
defense of others committed in order to protect the lives of fetuses similar rationales are used to justify invasion of 
privacy and stalking of doctors clinic workers and patients even by police officers in the united states four physicians 
who performed abortions have been murdered david gunn john britton barnett slepian and george tiller also murdered in 
the us and australia have been other personnel at abortion clinics including receptionists and security guards such as 
james barrett shannon lowney lee ann nichols and robert sanderson woundings eg garson romalis and attempted murders have 
also taken place in the united states and canada hundreds of bombings arsons acid attacks invasions and incidents of 
vandalism against abortion providers have occurred notable perpetrators of antiabortion violence include eric robert 
rudolph scott roeder shelley shannon and paul jennings hill the first person to be executed in the united states for 
murdering an abortion provider legal protection of access to abortion has been brought into some countries where 
abortion is legal these laws typically seek to protect abortion clinics from obstruction vandalism picketing and other 
actions or to protect patients and employees of such facilities from threats and harassment far more common than 
physical violence is psychological coercion in chris danze organized pro life organizations throughout texas to prevent 
the construction of a planned parenthood facility in austin the organizations released the personal information online 
of those involved with construction sending them up to phone calls a day and contacting their churches most recently 
protesters have started recording patients on camera other animals spontaneous abortion occurs in various animals for 
example in sheep it may be caused by crowding through doors or being chased by dogs in cows abortion may be caused by 
contagious disease such as brucellosis or campylobacter but can often be controlled by vaccination eating pine needles 
can also induce abortions in cows in horses a fetus may be aborted or resorbed if it has lethal white syndrome 
congenital intestinal aganglionosis foal embryos that are homozygous for the dominant white gene ww are theorized to 
also be aborted or resorbed before birth viral infection can cause abortion in dogs cats can experience spontaneous 
abortion for many reasons including hormonal imbalance a combined abortion and spaying is performed on pregnant cats 
especially in trapneuterreturn programs to prevent unwanted kittens from being born female rodents may terminate a 
pregnancy when exposed to the smell of a male not responsible for the pregnancy known as the bruce effect abortion may 
also be induced in animals in the context of animal husbandry for example abortion may be induced in mares that have 
been mated improperly or that have been purchased by owners who did not realize the mares were pregnant or that are 
pregnant with twin foals feticide can occur in horses and zebras due to male harassment of pregnant mares or forced 
copulation although the frequency in the wild has been questioned male gray langur monkeys may attack females following 
male takeover causing miscarriage references citations notes external links organization world health safe abortion 
technical and policy guidance for health systems nd ed ed geneva world health organization isbn abortion policies a 
global review published by the united nations