
abraham ebrhm hm hebrew avraham listen originally abram is the first of the three biblical patriarchs his story told in 
chapters through of the book of genesis plays a prominent role in judaism christianity and islam the narrative revolves 
around the themes of posterity and land rights abraham was called by god to leave the house of his father terah and 
settle in a land which was already settled by the descendants of canaan however god promised it to abraham and his 
progeny various candidates were put forward who might inherit the land after him but all were dismissed except for isaac 
abrahams son by his halfsister sarah abraham purchased the cave of the patriarchs at hebron to be sarahs grave when she 
died thus establishing his right to that land in the second generation abrahams heir isaac was married to a woman from 
his own relatives thus ruling the canaanites out of any right to his inheritance abraham later married keturah and had 
six more sons but on his death when he was buried beside sarah it was isaac who received all abrahams goods while the 
other sons received only gifts the bibles internal chronology places abraham around bce despite this there is nothing 
specific in the genesis stories that can be definitively related to known history in or around canaan in the early 
second millennium bce as a result it is now widely agreed that the socalled patriarchalancestral period is a later 
literary construct not a period in the actual history of the ancient world professor paula mcnutt the majority of 
scholars believe that the pentateuch was composed in the persian period roughly bce as a result of tensions between the 
jewish landowners who had stayed in judah during the babylonian captivity and claimed abraham as the father through whom 
they traced their right to the land and the returning priestly exiles who based their claim to dominance on moses and 
the exodus tradition genesis narrative the story of abraham is related in genesis of the hebrew bible abrams origins and 
calling terah the tenth in descent from noah had three sons abram nahor and haran haran fathered lot who was thus abrams 
nephew and died in his native city ur of the chaldees abram married sarai who was barren terah with abram sarai and lot 
then departed for canaan but settled in a place named haran where terah died at the age of genesis the lord had told 
abram to leave his country and kindred and go to a land that he would show him and promised to make of him a great 
nation bless him make his name great bless them that bless him and curse him that curses him genesis abram was years old 
when he left haran with his wife sarai his nephew lot and the substance and souls that they had acquired and traveled to 
shechem in canaan genesis abram and sarai there was a severe famine in the land of canaan so that abram and lot and 
their households traveled south to egypt on the way abram told his wife sarai to say that she was his sister so that the 
egyptians would not kill him genesis when they entered egypt the princes of pharaoh praised sarais beauty to pharaoh and 
she was taken into his palace and abram was given provisions oxen and heasses and menservants and maidservants and 
sheasses and camels however god afflicted pharaoh and his household with great plagues for which he tried to find the 
reason genesis upon discovering that sarai was a married woman pharaoh demanded that they and their household leave 
immediately along with all their goods genesis abram and lot separate when they came back to the bethel and hai area 
abrams and lots sizable livestock herds occupied the same pastures this became a problem for the herdsmen who were 
assigned to each familys cattle the conflicts between herdsmen had become so troublesome that abram graciously suggested 
that lot choose a separate area either on the left hand north or on the right hand south that there be no conflict 
amongst brethren but lot chose to go east to the plain of jordan where the land was well watered everywhere as far as 
zoar and he dwelled in the cities of the plain toward sodom abram went south to hebron and settled in the plain of mamre 
where he built another altar to worship god genesis abram and chedorlaomer during the rebellion of the jordan river 
cities against elam genesis abrams nephew lot was taken prisoner along with his entire household by the invading elamite 
forces the elamite army came to collect the spoils of war after having just defeated the king of sodoms armies genesis 
lot and his family at the time were settled on the outskirts of the kingdom of sodom which made them a visible target 
genesis one person who escaped capture came and told abram what happened once abram received this news he immediately 
assembled trained servants abrams force headed north in pursuit of the elamite army who were already worn down from the 
battle of siddim when they caught up with them at dan abram devised a battle plan by splitting his group into more than 
one unit and launched a night raid not only were they able to free the captives abrams unit chased and slaughtered the 
elamite king chedorlaomer at hobah just north of damascus they freed lot as well as his household and possessions and 
recovered all of the goods from sodom that had been taken genesis upon abrams return sodoms king came out to meet with 
him in the valley of shaveh the kings dale also melchizedek king of salem jerusalem a priest of god most high brought 
out bread and wine and blessed abram and god abram then gave melchizedek a tenth of everything the king of sodom then 
offered to let abram keep all the possessions if he would merely return his people although he released the captives 
abram refused any reward from the king of sodom other than the share to which his allies were entitled genesis abrahamic 
covenant the word of god came to abram in a vision and repeated the promise of the land and descendants as numerous as 
the stars abram and god made a covenant ceremony and god told of the future bondage of israel in egypt god described to 
abram the land that his offspring would claim the land of the kenites kenizzites kadmonites hittites perizzites rephaims 
amorites canaanites girgashites and jebusites genesis abram and hagar abram and sarai tried to make sense of how he 
would become a progenitor of nations since after years of living in canaan no child had been born sarai then offered her 
egyptian handmaiden hagar for abram to consort with so that he may have a child by her as his wife after hagar found she 
was pregnant she began to despise her mistress sarai therefore sarai mistreated hagar and hagar fled away en route the 
angel of the lord spoke with hagar at the fountain in the way to shur he instructed her to return and that her son would 
be a wild ass of a man his hand shall be against every man and every mans hand against him and he shall dwell in the 
face of all his brethren she was told to call her son ishmael hagar then called the lord who spoke to her elroi thou god 
seest me kjv from that day the well was called beerlahairoi the well of him that liveth and seeth me kjv margin she then 
did as she was instructed by returning to her mistress in order to have her child abram was eightysix years of age when 
ishmael was born genesis abraham and sarah thirteen years later when abram was ninetynine years of age god declared 
abrams new name abraham a father of many nations genesis abraham then received the instructions for the covenant of 
which circumcision was to be the signgenesis then god declared sarais new name sarah and blessed her and told abraham i 
will give thee a son also of her genesis but abraham laughed and said in his heart shall a child be born unto him that 
is an hundred years old and shall sarah that is ninety years old bear genesis immediately after abrahams encounter with 
god he had his entire household of men including himself age and ishmael age circumcised genesis abrahams three visitors 
not long afterward during the heat of the day abraham had been sitting at the entrance of his tent by the terebinths of 
mamre he looked up and saw three men in the presence of god then he ran and bowed to the ground to welcome them abraham 
then offered to wash their feet and fetch them a morsel of bread of which they assented abraham rushed to sarahs tent to 
order cakes made from choice flour then he ordered a servantboy to prepare a choice calf when all was prepared he set 
curds milk and the calf before them waiting on them under a tree as they ate genesis one of the visitors told abraham 
that upon his return next year sarah would have a son while at the tent entrance sarah overheard what was said and she 
laughed to herself about the prospect of having a child at their ages the visitor inquired of abraham why sarah laughed 
at bearing a child at her age as nothing is too hard for god frightened sarah denied laughing abrahams plea after eating 
abraham and the three visitors got up they walked over to the peak that overlooked the cities of the plain to discuss 
the fate of sodom and gomorrah for their detestable sins that were so great it moved god to action because abrahams 
nephew was living in sodom god revealed plans to confirm and judge these cities at this point the two other visitors 
left for sodom then abraham turned to the lord and pleaded decrementally with him from fifty persons to less that if 
there were at least ten righteous men found in the city would not god spare the city for the sake of ten righteous 
people god declared that he would not destroy the city genesis when the two visitors got to sodom to conduct their 
report they planned on staying in the city square however abrahams nephew lot met with them and strongly insisted that 
these two men stay at his house for the night a rally of men stood outside of lots home and demanded that they bring out 
his guests so that they may know v them however lot objected and offered his virgin daughters who had not known v man to 
the rally of men instead they rejected that notion and sought to break down lots door to get to his male guests genesis 
thus confirming that their cry had waxed great before the lord and they would be destroyed genesis early the next 
morning abraham went to the place where he stood before the lord he looked out toward sodom and gomorrah and saw what 
became of the cities of the plain where not even ten righteous v had been found as the smoke of the land went up as the 
smoke of a furnace genesis abraham and abimelech abraham settled between kadesh and shur in the land of the philistines 
while he was living in gerar abraham openly claimed that sarah was his sister upon discovering this news king abimelech 
had her brought to him god then came to abimelech in a dream and declared that taking her would result in death because 
she was a mans wife abimelech had not laid hands on her so he inquired if he would also slay a righteous nation 
especially since abraham had claimed that he and sarah were siblings in response god told abimelech that he did indeed 
have a blameless heart and that is why he continued to exist however should he not return the wife of abraham back to 
him god would surely destroy abimelech and his entire household abimelech was informed that abraham was a prophet who 
would pray for himgenesis early next morning abimelech informed his servants of his dream and approached abraham 
inquiring as to why he had brought such great guilt upon his kingdom abraham stated that he thought there was no fear of 
god in that place and that they might kill him for his wife then abraham defended what he had said as not being a lie at 
all and yet indeed she is my sister she is the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother and she became my 
wife genesis abimelech returned sarah to abraham and gave him gifts of sheep oxen and servants and invited him to settle 
wherever he pleased in abimelechs lands further abimelech gave abraham a thousand pieces of silver to serve as sarahs 
vindication before all abraham then prayed for abimelech and his household since the lord had stricken the women with 
infertility because of the taking of sarah genesis after living for some time in the land of the philistines abimelech 
and phicol the chief of his troops approached abraham because of a dispute that resulted in a violent confrontation at a 
well abraham then reproached abimelech due to his philistine servants aggressive attacks and the seizing of abrahams 
well abimelech claimed ignorance of the incident then abraham offered a pact by providing sheep and oxen to abimelech 
further to attest that abraham was the one who dug the well he also gave abimelech seven ewes for proof because of this 
sworn oath they called the place of this well beersheba after abimelech and phicol headed back to philistia abraham 
planted a grove in beersheba and called upon the name of the lord the everlasting god genesis birth of isaac as had been 
prophesied in mamre the previous year genesis sarah became pregnant and bore a son to abraham on the first anniversary 
of the covenant of circumcision abraham was an hundred years old when his son whom he named isaac was born and he 
circumcised him when he was eight days old genesis for sarah the thought of giving birth and nursing a child at such an 
old age also brought her much laughter as she declared god hath made me to laugh so that all that hear will laugh with 
me genesis isaac continued to grow and on the day he was weaned abraham held a great feast to honor the occasion during 
the celebration however sarah found ishmael mocking an observation that would begin to clarify the birthright of isaac 
genesis abraham and ishmael ishmael was fourteen years old when abrahams son isaac was born to a different mother sarah 
sarah had finally borne her own child even though she had passed her child bearing period when she found ishmael teasing 
isaac sarah told abraham to send both ishmael and hagar away she declared that ishmael would not share in isaacs 
inheritance abraham was greatly distressed by his wifes words and sought the advice of his god the lord told abraham not 
to be distressed but to do as his wife commanded god reassured abraham that in isaac shall seed be called to thee 
genesis he also said that ishmael would make a nation because he is thy seed genesis early the next morning abraham 
brought hagar and ishmael out together he gave her bread and water and sent them away the two wandered in the wilderness 
of beersheba until her bottle of water was completely consumed in a moment of despair she burst into tears after god 
heard the boys voice an angel of god confirmed to hagar that he would become a great nation a well of water then 
appeared so that it saved their lives as the boy grew he became a skilled archer living in the wilderness of paran 
eventually his mother found a wife for ishmael from her home country the land of egypt genesis abraham and isaac at some 
point in isaacs youth abraham was commanded by god to offer his son up as a sacrifice in the land of moriah the 
patriarch traveled three days until he came to the mount that god told him of he commanded the servants to remain while 
he and isaac proceeded alone into the mount isaac carried the wood upon which he would be sacrificed along the way isaac 
asked his father where the animal for the burnt offering was to which abraham replied god will provide himself a lamb 
for a burnt offering just as abraham was about to sacrifice his son he was interrupted by the angel of the lord and he 
saw behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns which he sacrificed instead of his son for his obedience he 
received another promise of numerous descendants and abundant prosperity after this event abraham went to beersheba 
genesis later years sarah died and abraham buried her in the cave of the patriarchs the cave of machpelah near hebron 
which he had purchased along with the adjoining field from ephron the hittite genesis after the death of sarah abraham 
took another wife a concubine named keturah by whom he had six sons zimran jokshan medan midian ishbak and shuah genesis 
abraham lived years and was buried in the cave of machpelah by his sons isaac and ishmael genesis chronicles family tree 
historicity and origins historicity in the early to midth century leading scholars such as william f albright and 
albrecht alt believed the patriarchs and matriarchs to be either real individuals or believable composite people living 
in the patriarchal age the nd millennium bce in the s new conclusions about israels past and the biblical texts 
challenged this portrait the two works largely responsible were thomas l thompsons the historicity of the patriarchal 
narratives and john van seters abraham in history and tradition thompsons argument based on archaeology and ancient 
texts was that no compelling evidence pointed to the patriarchs living in the nd millennium and that the biblical texts 
reflected first millennium conditions and concerns van seters basing himself on an examination of the patriarchal 
stories agreed with thompson that their names social milieu and messages strongly suggested that they were iron age 
creations by the beginning of the st century archaeologists had given up hope of recovering any context that would make 
abraham isaac or jacob credible historical figures origins of the narrative abrahams name is apparently very ancient as 
the tradition found in genesis no longer understands its original meaning probably father is exalted the meaning offered 
in genesis father of a multitude is a popular etymology his story like those of the other patriarchs most likely had a 
substantial oral prehistory at some stage the oral traditions became part of the written tradition of the pentateuch a 
majority of scholars believes this stage belongs to the persian period roughly bce the mechanisms by which this came 
about remain unknown but there are currently two important hypotheses the first called persian imperial authorisation is 
that the postexilic community devised the torah as a legal basis on which to function within the persian imperial system 
the second is that pentateuch was written to provide the criteria for who would belong to the post exilic jewish 
community and to establish the power structures and relative positions of its various groups notably the priesthood and 
the lay elders nevertheless the completion of the torah and its elevation to the centre of postexilic judaism was as 
much or more about combining older texts as writing new ones the final pentateuch was based on existing traditions in 
ezekiel written during the exile ie in the first half of the th century bce ezekiel an exile in babylon tells how those 
who remained in judah are claiming ownership of the land based on inheritance from abraham but the prophet tells them 
they have no claim because they dont observe torah isaiah similarly testifies of tension between the people of judah and 
the returning postexilic jews the gl stating that god is the father of israel and that israels history begins with the 
exodus and not with abraham the conclusion to be inferred from this and similar evidence eg ezranehemiah is that the 
figure of abraham must have been preeminent among the great landowners of judah at the time of the exile and after 
serving to support their claims to the land in opposition to those of the returning exiles abraham in religious 
traditions overview abraham is given a high position of respect in three major world faiths judaism christianity and 
islam in judaism he is the founding father of the covenant the special relationship between the jewish people and god a 
belief which gives the jews a unique position as the chosen people of god in christianity the apostle paul taught that 
abrahams faith preceding the mosaic law in god made him the prototype of all believers circumcised and uncircumcised the 
islamic prophet muhammad claimed abraham whose submission to god constituted islam as a believer before the fact and 
undercut jewish claims to an exclusive relationship with god and the covenant judaism in jewish tradition abraham is 
called avraham avinu our father abraham signifying that he is both the biological progenitor of the jews including 
converts according to jewish tradition and the father of judaism the first jew his life can be read in the weekly torah 
reading portions predominantly in the parashot lechlecha vayeira chayei sarah and toledot christianity abraham abram 
does not loom so large in christianity as he does in judaism and islam it is jesus as the messiah who is central to 
christianity and the idea of a divine christ is what separates christianity from the other two religions in romans 
abrahams merit is less his obedience to the divine will than his faith in gods ultimate grace this faith provides him 
the merit for gods having chosen him for the covenant and the covenant becomes one of faith not obedience i the roman 
catholic church calls abraham our father in faith in the eucharistic prayer of the roman canon recited during the mass 
see abraham in the catholic liturgy he is also commemorated in the calendars of saints of several denominations on 
august by the maronite church august in the coptic church and the assyrian church of the east with the full office for 
the latter and on october by the roman catholic church and the lutheran churchmissouri synod in the introduction to his 
thcentury translation of the golden legends account of abraham william caxton noted that this patriarchs life was read 
in church on quinquagesima sunday he is the patron saint of those in the hospitality industry the eastern orthodox 
church commemorates him as the righteous forefather abraham with two feast days in its liturgical calendar the first 
time is on october for those churches which follow the traditional julian calendar october falls on october of the 
modern gregorian calendar where he is commemorated together with his nephew righteous lot the other is on the sunday of 
the forefathers two sundays before christmas when he is commemorated together with other ancestors of jesus abraham is 
also mentioned in the divine liturgy of saint basil the great just before the anaphora and abraham and sarah are invoked 
in the prayers said by the priest over a newly married couple islam islam focuses on abraham arabic ibrhm more than 
either judaism or christianity there is nevertheless an important difference with the other abrahamic faiths where 
judaism holds that one becomes a descendant of abraham through birth and christianity that one becomes a descendant 
through faith islam holds that descent is unimportant abraham in other words is not the father of the believing 
community but a link in the chain of prophets that begins with adam and culminates in mohammad ibrhm is mentioned in 
chapters of the quran more often than any other biblical personage apart from moses he is called both a hanif monotheist 
and muslim one who surrenders to god and muslims regard him as a prophet and patriarch the archetype of the perfect 
muslim and the revered reformer of the kaaba in mecca islamic traditions consider ibrhm abraham the first pioneer of 
islam which is also called millat ibrahim the religion of abraham and that his purpose and mission throughout his life 
was to proclaim the oneness of god in islam he is referred to as ibrahim el khalil meaning abraham the friend of allah 
abraham in the arts painting and sculpture paintings on the life of abraham tend to focus on only a few incidents the 
sacrifice of isaac meeting melchizedek entertaining the three angels hagar in the desert and a few others additionally 
martin okane a professor of biblical studies writes that the parable of lazarus resting in the bosom of abraham as 
described in the gospel of luke became an iconic image in christian works according to okane artists often chose to 
divert from the common literary portrayal of lazarus sitting next to abraham at a banquet in heaven and instead focus on 
the somewhat incongruous notion of abraham the most venerated of patriarchs holding a naked and vulnerable child in his 
bosom several artists have been inspired by the life of abraham including albrecht drer caravaggio donatello raphael 
philip van dyck dutch painter and claude lorrain french painter rembrandt van rijn dutch created at least seven works on 
abraham petruspaulus rubens did several marc chagall did at least five on abraham gustave dor french illustrator did six 
and james jacques joseph tissot french painter and illustrator did over twenty works on the subject the sarcophagus of 
junius bassus depicts a set of biblical stories including abraham about to sacrifice isaac these sculpted scenes are on 
the outside of a marble early christian sarcophagus used for the burial of junius bassus he died in this sarcophagus has 
been described as probably the single most famous piece of early christian relief sculpture the sarcophagus was 
originally placed in or under old st peters basilica was rediscovered in and is now below the modern basilica in the 
museo storico del tesoro della basilica di san pietro museum of saint peters basilica in the vatican the base is 
approximately feet the old testament scenes depicted were chosen as precursors of christs sacrifice in the new testament 
in an early form of typology just to the right of the middle is daniel in the lions den and on the left is abraham about 
to sacrifice isaac george segal created figural sculptures by molding plastered gauze strips over live models in his 
work abrahams farewell to ishmael the human condition was central to his concerns and segal used the old testament as a 
source for his imagery this sculpture depicts the dilemma faced by abraham when sarah demanded that he expel hagar and 
ishmael in the sculpture the fathers tenderness sarahs rage and hagars resigned acceptance portray a range of human 
emotions the sculpture was donated to the miami art museum after the artists death in abraham in christian iconography 
usually abraham can be identified by the context of the image the meeting with melchizedek the three visitors or the 
sacrifice of isaac in solo portraits a sword or knife may be used as his attribute as in this statue by gian maria 
morlaiter or this painting by lorenzo monaco he always wears a gray or white beard as early as the beginning of the rd 
century christian art followed christian typology in making the sacrifice of isaac a foreshadowing of christs sacrifice 
on the cross and its memorial in the sacrifice of the mass see for example this thcentury christian altar engraved with 
abrahams and other sacrifices taken to prefigure that of christ in the eucharist some early christian writers 
interpreted the three visitors as the triune god thus in santa maria maggiore rome a thcentury mosaic portrays only the 
visitors against a gold ground and puts semitransparent copies of them in the heavenly space above the scene in eastern 
orthodox art the visit is the chief means by which the trinity is pictured example some images do not include abraham 
and sarah like andrei rublevs trinity which shows only the three visitors as beardless youths at a table literature fear 
and trembling original danish title frygt og bven is an influential philosophical work by sren kierkegaard published in 
under the pseudonym johannes de silentio john the silent kierkegaard wanted to understand the anxiety that must have 
been present in abraham when god asked him to sacrifice his son music in steve reich released an opera named the cave 
the title refers to the cave of the patriarchs the narrative of the opera is based on the story of abraham and his 
immediate family as it is recounted in the various religious texts and as it is understood by individual people from 
different cultures and religious traditions bob dylans highway revisited is the title track for his album highway 
revisited in rolling stone magazine ranked the song as number in their greatest songs of all time the song has five 
stanzas in each stanza someone describes an unusual problem that is ultimately resolved on highway in stanza god tells 
abraham to kill me a son god wants the killing done on highway abram the original name of the biblical abraham is also 
the name of dylans own father film and television in the americanitalian epic film the bible in the beginning directed 
by john huston and based on the first chapters of genesis abraham is played by george c scott with ava gardner as sarah 
a television movie about the patriarch abraham starred richard harris as abraham and barbara hershey as sarah see also 
abraham in islam abrahams gate at tel dan abraham in history and tradition book book of abraham bosom of abraham 
gathering of israel genealogies of genesis jewish kabbalah pearl of great price table of prophets of abrahamic religions 
the evil nimrod vs the righteous abraham notes references bibliography external links abraham from the encyclopdia 
britannica at wikisource abraham at chabadorg abraham smashes the idols accessed march journey and life of the patriarch 
abraham a map dating back to kitbiqn