abrahamic religions also semitic religions are monotheistic faiths of middle eastern origin emphasizing and tracing
their common origin to abraham or recognizing a spiritual tradition identified with him they comprise one of the major
divisions in comparative religion along with indian and east asian religions as of the early st century it was estimated
that of the worlds population billion people considered themselves adherents of the abrahamic religions about of other
religions and of no organized religion the largest abrahamic religions in chronological order of founding are judaism st
millennium bce christianity st century ce and islam th century ce the bah faith th century ce is sometimes listed as
well abrahamic religions with fewer adherents include the rastafari movement samaritanism druzism mandaeism the bb faith
etymology it has been suggested that the phrase abrahamic religion may simply mean that all these religions come from
one spiritual source christians refer to abraham as a father in faithrom there is an islamic religious term millat
ibrahim faith of ibrahim indicating that islam sees itself as having practices tied to the traditions of abraham jewish
tradition claims descendance from abraham and adherents follow his practices and ideals as the first of the three
spiritual fathers or biblical patriarchs abraham isaac and jacob all the major abrahamic religions claim a direct
lineage to abraham abraham is recorded in the torah as the ancestor of the israelites through his son isaac born to
sarah through a promise made in genesisgen the sacred text of christianity is the christian bible the first part of
which the old testament is derived from the jewish bible leading to similar ancestry claims as above though most
christians are gentiles who consider themselves as grafted into the family tree under the new covenant see significance
of abraham for christians for details it is the islamic tradition that muhammad as an arab is descended from abrahams
son ishmael jewish tradition also equates the descendants of ishmael ishmaelites with arabs as the descendants of isaac
by jacob who was also later known as israel are the israelites other terms sometimes used include abrahamic faiths
abrahamic traditions religions of abraham abrahamic monotheistic religions semitic religions semitic monotheistic
religions and semitic one god religions adam dodds argues that the term abrahamic faiths while helpful can be considered
misleading as it conveys an unspecified historical and theological commonality that is problematic on closer examination
while there is commonality among the religions in large measure their shared ancestry is peripheral to their respective
foundational beliefs and thus conceals crucial differences for example the common christian beliefs of incarnation
trinity and jesus resurrection are not accepted by judaism or islam see for example islamic view of jesus death there
are key beliefs in both islam and judaism that are not shared by most of christianity such as strict monotheism and
adherence to divine law and key beliefs of islam and christianity not shared by judaism such as the prophetic and
messianic position of jesus respectively origins and history judaism regards itself as the religion of the descendants
of jacob a grandson of abraham it has a strictly unitary view of god and the central holy book for almost all branches
is the masoretic text as elucidated in the oral torah in the th century and th centuries judaism developed a small
number of branches of which the most significant are orthodox conservative and reform christianity began as a sect of
judaism in the mediterranean basin of the st century ce and evolved into a separate religionthe christian churchwith
distinctive beliefs and practices jesus is the central figure of christianity considered by almost all denominations to
be divine one person of a triune god the christian biblical canon is usually held to be the ultimate authority alongside
sacred tradition in some denominations such as roman catholicism and eastern orthodoxy over many centuries christianity
divided into three main branches orthodox catholic and protestant dozens of significant denominations and hundreds of
smaller ones islam arose in arabia in the th century ce with a strictly unitary view of god muslims typically hold the
quran to be the ultimate authority as revealed and elucidated through the teachings and practices of a central but not
divine prophet muhammad the islamic faith consider all prophets and messengers from adam through the final messenger
muhammad to carry the same islamic monotheistic principles soon after its founding islam split into two main branches
sunni and shia each of which now have a number of denominations lesserknown abrahamic religions originally offshoots of
shia islam include the bah faith and druze common aspects the unifying characteristic of abrahamic religions is that all
accept the tradition that god revealed himself to the patriarch abraham all are monotheistic and conceive god to be a
transcendent creator and the source of moral law their religious texts feature many of the same figures histories and
places although they often present them with different roles perspectives and meanings believers who agree on these
similarities and the common abrahamic origin tend to also be more positive towards other abrahamic groups in these three
abrahamic religions the individual god and nature are highly separate from each other also these abrahamic religions
believe in a judging paternal fully external god to which the individual and nature are subordinate one seeks salvation
or transcendence not by meditation contemplating the natural world or via philosophical speculation but by seeking to
please god or to comply such as obedience with gods wishes or his law and see divine revelation as outside of self
nature and custom in these abrahamic religions not only are humans not a part of nature but nature and the earth are
subordinate to humans in fact humans are explicitly instructed to rule over and to subdue the earth monotheism all
abrahamic religions claim to be monotheistic worshiping an exclusive god though known by different names all of these
religions believe that god creates is one rules reveals loves judges punishes and forgives however although christianity
does not profess to believe in three gods but rather three persons or hypostases united in one essence the trinitarian
doctrine which is a fundamental of faith for the vast majority of christian denominations conflicts with jewish and
muslim concepts of monotheism since the conception of divine trinity is not amenable to tawhid the islamic doctrine of
monotheism islam considers christianity to be variously polytheistic or idolatrous jesus arabic isa or yasu among
muslims and arab christians respectively is revered by christianity and islam but with vastly differing conceptions
viewed as the saviour by christians and god incarnate by most christians as well and as a prophet of islam by muslims
however the worship of jesus or the ascribing of partners to god known as shirk in islam and shituf in judaism is
typically viewed as the heresy of idolatry by islam and judaism the incarnation of god into human form is also seen as a
heresy by judaism as well as islam theological continuity all the abrahamic religions affirm one eternal god who created
the universe who rules history who sends prophetic and angelic messengers and who reveals the divine will through
inspired scriptures they also affirm that obedience to this creator god is to be lived out historically and that one day
god will unilaterally intervene in human history on the day of judgment scripture all abrahamic religions believe that
god guides humanity through revelation to prophets and each religion recognizes that god revealed teachings up to and
including those in their own scripture ethical orientation an ethical orientation all these religions speak of a choice
between good and evil which is associated with obedience or disobedience to a single god and to divine law
eschatological world view an eschatological world view of history and destiny beginning with the creation of the world
and the concept that god works through history and ending with a resurrection of the dead and final judgment and world
to come importance of jerusalem jerusalem is considered judaisms holiest city its origins can be dated to bce when
according to biblical tradition david established it as the capital of the united kingdom of israel and his son solomon
built the first temple on mount moriah since the hebrew bible relates that isaacs sacrifice took place there mount
moriahs importance for jews predates even these prominent events jews thrice daily pray in its direction including in
their prayers pleas for the restoration and the rebuilding of the holy temple the third temple on mount moriah close the
passover service with the wistful statement next year in built jerusalem and recall the city in the blessing at the end
of each meal jerusalem has served as the only capital for five out of six jewish states that have existed in israel
since bce the united kingdom of israel the kingdom of judah yehud medinata the hasmonean kingdom and modern israel with
the exception of the khazar state it has been majority jewish since about and continues through today jerusalem was an
early center of christianity there has been a continuous christian presence there since william r kenan jr professor of
the history of christianity at the university of virginia charlottesville writes that from the middle of the th century
to the islamic conquest in the middle of the th century the roman province of palestine was a christian nation with
jerusalem its principal city according to the new testament jerusalem was the city jesus was brought to as a child to be
presented at the templeluke and for the feast of the passoverluke he preached and healed in jerusalem unceremoniously
drove the money changers in disarray from the temple there held the last supper in an upper room traditionally the
cenacle there the night before he is said to have died on the cross was arrested in gethsemane the six parts to jesus
trialthree stages in a religious court and three stages before a roman courtwere all held in jerusalem his crucifixion
at golgotha his burial nearby traditionally the church of the holy sepulchre and his resurrection and ascension and
prophecy to return all are said to have occurred or will occur there jerusalem the city of david and christ became holy
to muslims third after mecca and medina even though not mentioned by name in the quran the alaqsa mosque which
translates to farthest mosque in sura alisra in the quran and its surroundings are addressed in the quran as the holy
land muslim tradition has recorded in the ahadith identifies alaqsa with a mosque in jerusalem the first muslims did not
pray toward kaaba alharam mosque but toward alaqsa mosque in jerusalem this was the qibla for years the qibla was
switched to kaaba later on to fulfill the order of allah of praying in the direction of kaaba quran albaqarah we have
certainly seen the turning of your face o muhammad toward the heaven and we will surely turn you to a qiblah with which
you will be pleased so turn your face toward almasjid alharam and wherever you believers are turn your faces toward it
in prayer indeed those who have been given the scripture well know that it is the truth from their lord and allah is not
unaware of what they do quran another reason for its significance is its connection with the mirj where according to
traditional muslim piety muhammad ascended through the seven heavens on a winged mule named buraq guided by the
archangel gabriel beginning from the foundation stone on the temple mount in modern times under the dome of the rock
significance of abraham even though members of judaism christianity and islam do not all claim abraham as an ancestor
some members of these religions have tried to claim him as exclusively theirs for jews for jews abraham is simply with
his wife sarah the first jew the founding patriarch of the children of israel god promised abraham i will make of you a
great nation and i will bless yougen with abraham god entered into an everlasting covenant throughout the ages to be god
to you and to your offspring to comegen it is this covenant that makes abraham and his descendants jews not the
chronology of the name yhudi similarly converts who join the covenant are all identified as sons and daughters of
abraham and sarah abraham is primarily a revered ancestor or patriarch referred to as avraham avinu in hebrew abraham
our father to whom god made several promises chiefly that he would have numberless descendants who would receive the
land of canaan the promised land according to jewish tradition abraham was the first postflood prophet to reject
idolatry through rational analysis although shem and eber carried on the tradition from noah for christians christians
view abraham as an important exemplar of faith and a spiritual as well as physical ancestor of jesus the son of god
through whom god promised to bless all the families of the earth for christians abraham is a spiritual forebear as well
asrather than a direct ancestor depending on the individuals interpretation of paul the apostlerom with the abrahamic
covenant reinterpreted so as to be defined by faith in christ rather than biological descent or both by faith as well as
a direct ancestor in any case the emphasis is placed on faith being the only requirement for the abrahamic covenant to
apply see also new covenant and supersessionism in christian belief abraham is a role model of faithheb and his
obedience to god by offering isaac is seen as a foreshadowing of gods offering of his son jesusrom christian
commentators have a tendency to interpret gods promises to abraham as applying to christianity subsequent to and
sometimes rather than as in supersessionism being applied to judaism whose adherents rejected jesus they argue this on
the basis that just as abraham as a gentile before he was circumcised believed god and it was credited to him as
righteousness gen cf rom james those who have faith are children of abraham gal see also john this is most fully
developed in pauls theology where all who believe in god are spiritual descendants of abrahamrom gal however with
regards to rom and gal in both cases he refers to these spiritual descendants as the sons of godgal rather than children
of abraham for muslims for muslims abraham is a prophet the messenger of god who stands in the line from adam to
muhammad to whom god gave revelationsquran who raised the foundations of the house ie the kaabaquran with his first son
ismail a symbol of which is every mosque ibrahim abraham is the first in a genealogy for muhammad islam considers
abraham to be one of the first muslims surah the first monotheist in a world where monotheism was lost and the community
of those faithful to god thus being referred to as or our father abraham as well as ibrahim alhanif or abraham the
monotheist islam holds that it was ishmael ismail muhammads ancestor rather than isaac whom ibrahim was instructed to
sacrifice also the same as judaisim islam believes that abraham rejected idolatry through logical reasoning abraham is
also recalled in certain details of the annual hajj pilgrimage the religions see also section other abrahamic religions
judaism one of judaisms primary texts is the tanakh an account of the israelites relationship with god from their
earliest history until the building of the second temple c bce abraham is hailed as the first hebrew and the father of
the jewish people one of his greatgrandsons was judah from whom the religion ultimately gets its name the israelites
were initially a number of tribes who lived in the kingdom of israel and kingdom of judah after being conquered and
exiled some members of the kingdom of judah eventually returned to israel they later formed an independent state under
the hasmonean dynasty in the nd and st centuries bce before becoming a client kingdom of the roman empire which also
conquered the state and dispersed its inhabitants from the nd to the th centuries jews wrote the talmud a lengthy work
of legal rulings and biblical exegesis which along with the tanakh is a key text of judaism christianity christianity
began in the st century as a sect within judaism initially led by jesus his followers viewed him as the messiah as in
the confession of peter after his crucifixion and death they came to view him as god incarnate who was resurrected and
will return at the end of time to judge the living and the dead and create an eternal kingdom of god within a few
decades the new movement split from judaism after several periods of alternating persecution and relative peace vis a
vis the roman authorities under different administrations christianity became the state church of the roman empire in
but has been split into various churches from its beginning an attempt was made by the byzantine empire to unify
christendom but this formally failed with the eastwest schism of in the th century the birth and growth of protestantism
further split christianity into many denominations islam islam is based on the teachings of the quran although it
considers muhammad to be the seal of the prophets islam teaches that every prophet preached islam providing a historical
backstory for the religion by independently recognizing jewish and christian prophets and adding others the teachings of
quran are presented as the direct revelation and words of allah and earlier scriptures are considered to have been
corrupted over time islam meaning submission in the sense of submission to god is universal membership is open to anyone
like judaism it has a strictly unitary conception of god called tawhid or strict or simple monotheism early disputes
over who would lead muslims following the death of muhammad led to a split between sunni and shia islams two main
denominations god the abrahamic god is conceived of as eternal omnipotent omniscient and as the creator of the universe
god is further held to have the properties of holiness justice omnibenevolence and omnipresence proponents of abrahamic
faiths believe that god is also transcendent but at the same time personal and involved listening to prayer and reacting
to the actions of his creatures judaism in judaism god is strictly monotheistic god is an absolute one indivisible and
incomparable being who is the ultimate cause of all existence jewish tradition teaches that the true aspect of god is
incomprehensible and unknowable and that it is only gods revealed aspect that brought the universe into existence and
interacts with mankind and the world in judaism the one god of israel is the god of abraham isaac and jacob who is the
guide of the world delivered israel from slavery in egypt and gave them the mitzvot at mount sinai as described in the
torah the national god of the israelites has a proper name written yhwh hebrew modern yehovah tiberian yhwh in the
hebrew bible the name yhwh is a combination of the future present and past tense of the verb howa hebrew meaning to be
and translated literally means the selfexistent one a further explanation of the name was given to moses when yhwh
stated eheye asher eheye hebrew i will be that i will be the name relates to god as god truly is gods revealed essence
which transcends the universe it also represents gods compassion towards the world in jewish tradition another name of
god is elohim relating to the interaction between god and the universe god as manifest in the physical world it
designates the justice of god and means the one who is the totality of powers forces and causes in the universe
christianity in christianity god is the eternal being who created and preserves the world christians believe god to be
both transcendent and immanent involved in the world early christian views of god were expressed in the pauline epistles
and the early creeds which proclaimed one god and the divinity of jesus around the year tertullian formulated a version
of the doctrine of the trinity which clearly affirmed the divinity of jesus and came close to the later definitive form
produced by the ecumenical council of trinitarians who form the large majority of christians hold it as a core tenet of
their faith nontrinitarian denominations define the father the son and the holy spirit in a number of different ways the
theology of the attributes and nature of god has been discussed since the earliest days of christianity with irenaeus
writing in the nd century his greatness lacks nothing but contains all things in the th century john of damascus listed
eighteen attributes which remain widely accepted as time passed theologians developed systematic lists of these
attributes some based on statements in the bible eg the lords prayer stating that the father is in heaven others based
on theological reasoning islam there is only one god in islam allah is the arabic name for god ilh is the arabic term
used for a deity or a god in general islamic tradition also describes the names of god these names describe attributes
of god including most merciful the just the peace and blessing and the guardian islamic belief in god is distinct from
christianity in that god has no progeny this belief is summed up in chapter of the quran titled alikhlas which states
say he is allah who is one allah is the eternal the absolute he does not beget nor was he begotten nor is there to him
any equivalentquran the quran also draws a similitude between jesus and adamthe first human being created by godsaying
they were both created without a father by god who said the simple word be arabic kunquran thus both the torah and the
gospels are believed to be based upon divine revelation muslims revere the quran as the final uncorrupted word of god or
the final testament as revealed through the last prophet prophet muhammad muhammad is regarded as the seal of the
prophets ie the last in a long chain and islam as the final monotheist faith perfect in all respects as taught by the
quranquran religious scriptures all these religions rely on a body of scriptures some of which are considered to be the
word of godhence sacred and unquestionableand some the work of religious men revered mainly by tradition and to the
extent that they are considered to have been divinely inspired if not dictated by the divine being judaism the sacred
scriptures of judaism are the tanakh a hebrew acronym standing for torah law or teachings neviim prophets and ketuvim
writings these are complemented by and supplemented with various originally oral traditions midrash the mishnah the
talmud and collected rabbinical writings the tanakh or hebrew bible was composed between bce and bce by jewish prophets
kings and priests the hebrew text of the tanakh and the torah in particular is considered holy down to the last letter
transcribing is done with painstaking care an error in a single letter ornamentation or symbol of the stylized letters
that make up the hebrew torah text renders a torah scroll unfit for use hence the skills of a torah scribe are
specialist skills and a scroll takes considerable time to write and check christianity the sacred scriptures of most
christian groups are the old testament and the new testament the old testament in the protestant king james is the same
as the hebrew bible allowing for slight variations in grammar or slang the bible originally contained books however
books collectively called the apocrypha or deuterocanon depending on ones opinion of them were removed by martin luther
due to a lack of original hebrew sources for reference the books removed were baruch wisdom of ben sirach also known as
sirach or ecclesiasticus maccabees which notably contains the miracle of hanukkah maccabees wisdom tobit judith
additions to esther additions to daniel susanna song of the three children bel and the dragon the new testament
comprises four accounts of the life and teachings of jesus the four gospels traditionally attributed to the apostle
matthew the apostle john mark a student of the apostle peter and luke a student of the apostle paul as well as several
other writings by the apostles such as paul they are usually considered to be divinely inspired and together comprise
the christian bible thus most christians consider the fundamental teachings of the old testament in particular the ten
commandments as valid see biblical law in christianity for details however some christians believe that all old covenant
laws have been abrogated while others known as dualcovenant theology believe that nonjewish christians only have to
follow the noahic laws eg idolatry lying adultery theft the coming of jesus as the messiah and saviour of humankind as
predicted in the old testament would shed light on the true relationship between god and mankind by restoring the
emphasis of universal love and compassion as mentioned in the great commandment above the other commandments also
deemphasising the more legalistic and material precepts of mosaic law such as circumcision and the dietary constraints
and temple rites most of which would not apply to non jewish christian believers very few christians believe that the
link between old and new testaments in the bible means that judaism has been superseded by christianity as the new
israel and that jesus teachings described israel not as a geographic place but rather an association with god and
promise of salvation in heaven a revisionist position rejected by jews and others the vast majority of christian faiths
generally including catholicism orthodox christianity anglicanism and most forms of protestantism derive their beliefs
from the conclusions reached by the first council of nicaea in in a document known as the nicene creed this describes
the belief that god as a trinity of distinct persons with one substance became human on earth born as jesus pursuant to
the old testament scriptures was crucified by humanity died and was buried then was resurrected by god on the third day
to rise and enter the kingdom of heaven and sit at the right hand of god with a promise to return and establish a world
to come christians generally believe that faith in jesus is the way to achieve salvation and to enter into heaven andor
receive eternal life and that salvation is a gift given by the grace of god the vast majority of christian faiths
including catholicism orthodox christianity and most forms of protestantism recognize that the gospels were passed on by
oral tradition and were not set to paper until decades after the death of jesus and that the extant versions are copies
of those originals the version of the bible considered to be most valid in the sense of best conveying the true meaning
of the word of god has varied considerably the greek septuagint the syriac peshitta the latin vulgate the english king
james version and the russian synodal bible have been authoritative to different communities at different times in
particular christians usually consult the tanakh when preparing new translations although some believe that the
septuagint should be preferred as it was the bible of the early christian greek church and because they believe its
translators used a different hebrew bible to the ones that make up the current masoretic hebrew text as there are some
variant readings of the dead sea scrolls confirmed by the septuagint in the same sense that the jewish mystics viewed
the torah as something living and existing prior to any written text so too do christians view the bible and jesus
himself as gods word or logos in greek transcending written documents the sacred scriptures of the christian bible are
complemented by a large body of writings by individual christians and councils of christian leaders see canon law some
christian churches and denominations consider certain additional writings to be binding other christian groups consider
only the bible to be binding sola scriptura islam islams holiest book is the quran comprising suras chapters of the
quran however muslims also believe in the religious texts of judaism and christianity in their original forms albeit not
the current versions which they believe to be corrupted according to the quran and mainstream muslim belief the verses
of the quran were revealed by god through the archangel jibrail to muhammad on separate occasions these revelations were
written down and also memorized by hundreds of companions of mohammad these multiple sources were collected into one
official copy after the death of mohammed quran was copied on several copies and caliph uthman provided these copies to
different cities of islamic empire the quran mentions and reveres several of the israelite prophets including moses and
jesus among others see also prophets of islam the stories of these prophets are very similar to those in the bible
however the detailed precepts of the tanakh and the new testament are not adopted outright they are replaced by the new
commandments accepted as revealed directly by god through gabriel to muhammad and codified in the quran like the jews
with the torah muslims consider the original arabic text of the quran as uncorrupted and holy to the last letter and any
translations are considered to be interpretations of the meaning of the quran as only the original arabic text is
considered to be the divine scripture like the rabbinic oral law to the hebrew bible the quran is complemented by the
hadith a set of books by later authors recording the sayings of the prophet muhammad the hadith interpret and elaborate
quranic precepts islamic scholars have categorized each hadith at one of the following levels of authenticity or isnad
genuine sahih fair hasan or weak daif by the th century six major hadith collections were accepted as reliable to sunni
muslims sahih albukhari sahih muslim sunan ibn majah sunan abu dawud jami altirmidhi sunan annasaii shia muslims however
refer to other authenticated hadiths instead they are known collectively as the four books the hadith and the life story
of muhammad sira form the sunnah an authoritative supplement to the quran the legal opinions of islamic jurists faqh
provide another source for the daily practice and interpretation of islamic tradition see fiqh the quran contains
repeated references to the religion of abraham see suras in the quran this expression refers specifically to islam
sometimes in contrast to christianity and judaism as in sura for example they say become jews or christians if ye would
be guided to salvation say thou o muslims nay i would rather the religion of abraham the true and he joined not gods
with god in the quran abraham is declared to have been a muslim a hanif more accurately a primordial monotheist not a
jew nor a christian sura end times and afterlife in the major abrahamic religions there exists the expectation of an
individual who will herald the time of the end andor bring about the kingdom of god on earth in other words the
messianic prophecy judaism awaits the coming of the jewish messiah the jewish concept of messiah differs from the
christian concept in several significant ways despite the same term being applied to both the jewish messiah is not seen
as a god but as a mortal man who by his holiness is worthy of that description his appearance is not the end of history
rather it signals the coming of the world to come christianity awaits the second coming of christ though full preterists
believe this has already happened islam awaits both the second coming of jesus to complete his life and die and the
coming of mahdi sunnis in his first incarnation shia as the return of muhammad almahdi most abrahamic religions agree
that a human being comprises the body which dies and the soul which is capable of remaining alive beyond human death and
carries the persons essence and that god will judge each persons life accordingly after death the importance of this and
the focus on it as well as the precise criteria and end result differ between religions judaism judaisms views on the
afterlife the next world are quite diverse this can be attributed to the fact that although there clearly are traditions
in the hebrew bible of an afterlife see naboth and the witch of endor judaism focuses on this life and how to lead a
holy life to please god rather than future reward christianity christians have more diverse and definite teachings on
the end times and what constitutes afterlife most christian approaches either include different abodes for the dead
heaven hell limbo purgatory or universal reconciliation in which all souls are made in the image of god a small minority
teach annihilationism the doctrine that those persons who are not reconciled to god simply cease to exist though the
roman catholic church has no official teaching on what kind of place hell is and indeed allows that it might be a locale
of oblivion islam in islam god is said to be most compassionate and most merciful quran as well as the start of all
suras but one however god is also most just islam prescribes a literal hell for those who disobey god and commit gross
sin those who obey god and submit to god will be rewarded with their own place in paradise while sinners are punished
with fire there are also many other forms of punishment described depending on the sin committed hell is divided into
numerous levels those who worship and remember god are promised eternal abode in a physical and spiritual paradise
heaven is divided into seven levels with the highest level of paradise being the reward of those who have been most
virtuous the prophets and those killed while fighting for allah martyrs upon repentance to god many sins can be forgiven
on the condition they are not repeated as god is supremely merciful additionally those who believe in god but have led
sinful lives may be punished for a time and then eventually released into paradise if anyone dies in a state of shirk ie
associating god in any way such as claiming that he is equal with anything or denying him this is not pardonable he or
she will stay forever in hell once a person is admitted to paradise this person will abide there for eternity worship
and religious rites worship ceremonies and religionrelated customs differ substantially among the abrahamic religions
among the few similarities are a sevenday cycle in which one day is nominally reserved for worship prayer or other
religious activitiesshabbat sabbath or jumuah this custom is related to the biblical story of genesis where god created
the universe in six days and rested in the seventh judaism orthodox judaism practice is guided by the interpretation of
the torah and the talmud before the destruction of the temple in jerusalem jewish priests offered sacrifices there two
times daily since then the practice has been replaced until the temple is rebuilt by jewish men being required to pray
three times daily including the chanting of the torah and facing in the direction of jerusalems temple mount other
practices include circumcision dietary laws shabbat passover torah study tefillin purity and others conservative judaism
reform judaism and the reconstructionist movement all move away in different degrees from the strict tradition of the
law jewish womens prayer obligations vary by denomination in contemporary orthodox practice women do not read from the
torah and are only required to say certain parts of these daily services all versions of judaism share a common
specialized calendar containing many festivals the calendar is lunisolar with lunar months and a solar year an extra
month is added every second or third year to allow the shorter lunar year to catch up to the solar year all streams
observe the same festivals but some emphasize them differently as is usual with its extensive law system the orthodox
have the most complex manner of observing the festivals while the reform pay more attention to the simple symbolism of
each one christianity christian worship varies from denomination to denomination individual prayer is usually not
ritualised while group prayer may be ritual or nonritual according to the occasion during church services some form of
liturgy is frequently followed rituals are performed during sacraments which also vary from denomination to denomination
and usually include baptism and communion and may also include confirmation confession last rites and holy orders
catholic worship practice is governed by the roman missal and other documents individuals churches and denominations
place different emphasis on ritualsome denominations consider most ritual activity optional see adiaphora particularly
since the protestant reformation islam the followers of islam muslims are to observe the five pillars of islam the first
pillar is the belief in the oneness of allah and in muhammad as his final and most perfect prophet the second is to pray
five times daily salat towards the direction qibla of the kaaba in mecca the third pillar is alms giving zakah a portion
of ones wealth given to the poor or to other specified causes which means the giving of a specific share of ones wealth
and savings to persons or causes as is commanded in the quran and elucidated as to specific percentages for different
kinds of income and wealth in the hadith the normal share to be paid is two and a half percent of ones earnings this
increases if labour was not required and increases further if only capital or possessions alone were required ie
proceeds from renting space and increases to on unearned wealth such as treasurefinding and to on wealth that is
considered haram as part of attempting to make atonement for the sin such as that gained through financial interest riba
fasting sawm during the ninth month of the muslim lunar calendar ramadan is the fourth pillar of islam to which all
muslims after the age of puberty in good health as judged by a muslim doctor to be able fast without incurring grave
danger to health even in seemingly obvious situations a competent and upright muslim physician is required to agree that
are not menstruating are bound to observemissed days of the fast for any reason must be made up unless there be a
permanent illness such as diabetes that prevents a person from ever fasting in such a case restitution must be made by
feeding one poor person for each day missed finally muslims are also required if physically able to undertake a
pilgrimage to mecca at least once in ones life it is strongly recommended to do it as often as possible preferably once
a year only individuals whose financial position and health are severely insufficient are exempt from making hajj eg if
making hajj would put stress on ones financial situation but would not end up in homelessness or starvation it is still
required during this pilgrimage the muslims spend three to seven days in worship performing several strictly defined
rituals most notably circumambulating the kaaba among millions of other muslims and the stoning of the devil at mina at
the end of the hajj the heads of men are shaved sheep and other halal animals notably camels are slaughtered as a ritual
sacrifice by bleeding out at the neck according to a strictly prescribed ritual slaughter method similar to the jewish
kashrut to commemorate the moment when according to islamic tradition allah replaced abrahams son ishmael contrasted
with the judaeochristian tradition that isaac was the intended sacrifice with a sheep thereby preventing human sacrifice
the meat from these animals is then distributed locally to needy muslims neighbours and relatives finally the hajji puts
of ihram and the hajj is complete circumcision judaism practices circumcision for males as a matter of religious
obligation at the age of days old as does islam as part of sunnah the practice is not mandated by the quran western
christianity replaced that custom with a baptism ceremony varying according to the denomination but generally including
immersion aspersion or anointment with water the early church acts the council of jerusalem decided that circumcision is
not required for gentile christians the council of florence in the th century prohibited it paragraph of the catholic
catechism calls nonmedical amputation or mutilation immoral many countries with majorities of christian adherents have
low circumcision rates with the notable exceptions of the united states and the philippines coptic christianity and
ethiopian orthodoxy still observe circumcision see also aposthia male circumcision is among the rites of islam and is
part of the in arabic fitrah or the innate disposition and natural character and instinct of the human creation food
restrictions judaism and islam have strict dietary laws with permitted food known as kosher in judaism and halal in
islam these two religions prohibit the consumption of pork islam prohibits the consumption of alcoholic beverages of any
kind halal restrictions can be seen as a modification of the kashrut dietary laws so many kosher foods are considered
halal especially in the case of meat which islam prescribes must be slaughtered in the name of god hence in many places
muslims used to consume kosher food however some foods not considered kosher are considered halal in islam with rare
exceptions christians do not consider the old testaments strict food laws as relevant for todays church see also
biblical law in christianity most protestants have no set food laws but there are minority exceptions the roman catholic
church believes in observing abstinence and penance for example all fridays through the year and the time of lent are
penitential days the law of abstinence requires a catholic from years of age until death to abstain from eating meat on
fridays in honor of the passion of jesus on good friday the united states conference of catholic bishops obtained the
permission of the holy see for catholics in the us to substitute a penitential or even a charitable practice of their
own choosing eastern rite catholics have their own penitential practices as specified by the code of canons for the
eastern churches the seventhday adventist church sda embraces numerous old testament rules and regulations such as
tithing sabbath observance and jewish food laws therefore they do not eat pork shellfish or other foods considered
unclean under the old covenant the fundamental beliefs of the sda state that their members are to adopt the most
healthful diet possible and abstain from the unclean foods identified in the scripturesleviticus among others in the
christian bible the consumption of strangled animals and of blood was forbidden by apostolic decreeacts and are still
forbidden in the greek orthodox church according to german theologian karl josef von hefele who in his commentary on
canon ii of the second ecumenical council held in the th century at gangra notes we further see that at the time of the
synod of gangra the rule of the apostolic synod the council of jerusalem of acts with regard to blood and things
strangled was still in force with the greeks indeed it continued always in force as their euchologies still show he also
writes that as late as the eighth century pope gregory the third in forbade the eating of blood or things strangled
under threat of a penance of forty days jehovahs witnesses abstain from eating blood and from blood transfusions based
on acts sabbath observance sabbath in the bible is a weekly day of rest and time of worship it is observed differently
in judaism and christianity and informs a similar occasion in several other abrahamic faiths though many viewpoints and
definitions have arisen over the millennia most originate in the same textual tradition though not a day of rest
creation does not make god tired and therefore he did not rest on the th day in muslim belief islam holds friday as a
day of special prayer proselytism judaism judaism accepts converts but has had no explicit missionaries since the end of
the second temple era judaism states that nonjews can achieve righteousness by following noahide laws a set of moral
imperatives that according to the talmud were given by god as a binding set of laws for the children of noah that is all
of humanity the rambam rabbi moses maimonides one of the major jewish teachers commented quoting from our sages the
righteous people from other nations have a place in the world to come if they have acquired what they should learn about
the creator because the commandments applicable to the jews are much more detailed and onerous than noahide laws jewish
scholars have traditionally maintained that it is better to be a good nonjew than a bad jew thus discouraging conversion
in the us as of of married jews were married to nonjews see also conversion to judaism christianity christianity
encourages evangelism many christian organizations especially protestant churches send missionaries to nonchristian
communities throughout the world see also great commission forced conversions to catholicism have been documented at
various points throughout history the most prominently cited allegations are the conversions of the pagans after
constantine of muslims jews and eastern orthodox during the crusades of jews and muslims during the time of the spanish
inquisition where they were offered the choice of exile conversion or death and of the aztecs by hernn corts forced
conversions to protestantism have occurred as well notably during the reformation especially in england and ireland see
recusancy and popish plot forced conversions are condemned as sinful by major denominations such as the roman catholic
church which officially states that forced conversions pollute the christian religion and offend human dignity so that
past or present offenses are regarded as a scandal a cause of unbelief according to pope paul vi it is one of the major
tenets of catholic doctrine that mans response to god in faith must be free no one therefore is to be forced to embrace
the christian faith against his own will islam dawah is an important islamic concept which denotes the preaching of
islam dawah literally means issuing a summons or making an invitation a muslim who practices dawah either as a religious
worker or in a volunteer community effort is called a d plural dut a d is thus a person who invites people to understand
islam through a dialogical process and may be categorized in some cases as the islamic equivalent of a missionary as one
who invites people to the faith to the prayer or to islamic life dawah activities can take many forms some pursue
islamic studies specifically to perform dawah mosques and other islamic centers sometimes spread dawah actively similar
to evangelical churches others consider being open to the public and answering questions to be dawah recalling muslims
to the faith and expanding their knowledge can also be considered dawah in islamic theology the purpose of dawah is to
invite people both muslims and nonmuslims to understand the commandments of god as expressed in the quran and the sunnah
of the prophet as well as to inform them about muhammad dawah produces converts to islam which in turn grows the size of
the muslim ummah or community of muslims violent conflicts between abrahamic religions christians were killed by jews
during the bar kochba revolt the yemeni jewish himyar tribe led by king dhu nuwas massacred christians in the sasanian
conquest and occupation of jerusalem involved the massacre of christians by jews the wars between the emerging islamic
caliphates and the christian byzantine or eastern roman empire between the th and the th centuries ce were a series of
military political and religious conflicts which led to the islamization of large territories in the near east such as
egypt and syria the crusades end of th end of th century ce were a series of military expeditions from western europe to
the southern and eastern mediterranean a rather unsuccessful attempt by western catholic christians to conquer what was
perceived by all christians as the holy land from its muslim inhabitants in passing crusades were also marked with
conflicts between western and eastern orthodox syrojacobite and armenian christians and unilateral damage inflicted by
western christians to jews the conquest and the following reconquista of spain and founding of portugal beginning of th
end of th century ce were a series of wars between muslims and christians in the iberian peninsula resulting in the
founding of several muslim and christian medieval states and the final victory of the catholic crown of castile and
aragon against the muslim emirate of granada the ottoman conquest of the balkan peninsula midth end of th century ce
followed by a series of wars between the islamic ottoman empire and various christian powers and alliances end of th
beginning of th century ce was an important political military and cultural process for southeastern europe resulting in
the fall of the eastern roman or byzantine empire and its successor states and finally leading to the emerging of
several modern nations in that region the spanish inquisition was an attempt by the christian catholic church in spain
in the wake of the centuries long reconquista to suppress or expel jews and muslims and to prosecute christian heretics
openly jewish and muslim people were expelled rather than killed but many submitted to forced conversion to catholicism
to avoid expulsion the inquisitors often did not trust the converts and persecuted them cruelly for being secret
adherents of their original religions which was often true but sometimes fabricated jewish forced converts were known as
anusim or sometimes by the pejorative morrano pig at various points in history pogroms against jews were common in
christian europe and in many islamic areas see blood libel persecution of bahs and political accusations against the
bahai faith review the substantive efforts in parts of the world against the bahs and their religion between branches of
the same abrahamic religion the fourth crusade and subsequent wars between catholic europeans and the orthodox byzantine
greeks following the great schism the christian reformation of the th century ce was an attempt towards a religious
reform in the western catholic christian church which resulted in a series of religious wars between catholic and
emerging reformistprotestant christian forces during the th and th centuries ce throughout western europe the
anglospanish war was due to religious conflict between catholic and protestant christians and economic causes there have
been many violent conflicts between the sunni and shia branches of islam see shiasunni relations after the invasion of
iraq by a western coalition there was armed conflict between branches of islam with fighting and bombings even of
mosques between abrahamic religions and nonadherents religious hostility fueled the jewishroman wars many roman emperors
persecuted christians for example see diocletianic persecution some claim that during the initial expansion of both
christianity and islam a number of pagan communities were converted by force the catholic inquisition mentioned above
also targeted nonbelievers in the orthodox doctrines of roman catholicism and many lost their livelihoods or their lives
christian evangelism was a partial motivation for the colonization of the americas communist dictatorships practiced a
policy of religious oppression in favour of personality cults revering the leader or the state other abrahamic religions
historically the abrahamic religions have been considered to be judaism christianity and islam some of this is due to
the age and larger size of these three the other similar religions were seen as either too new to judge as being truly
in the same class or too small to be of significance to the category however some of the restriction of abrahamic to
these three is due only to tradition in historical classification therefore restricting the category to these three
religions has come under criticism the religions listed below here claim abrahamic classification either by the
religions themselves or by scholars who study them bah faith recently the bah faith which dates only to the late th
century has sometimes been listed as abrahamic by scholarly sources in various fields though smaller and younger than
the wellknown abrahamic religions the bah faith is significant because of its activities distribution and numbers the
religion is almost entirely contained in a single organized hierarchical community and is also recognized as the
secondmost geographically widespread religion after christianity the association of religion data archives estimated
some million bahs in and the only religion to consistently surpass population growth in each major region of the planet
over the last century often growing at twice the rate of the population bahullh the founder affirms the highest
religious station for abraham and generally for prophets mentioned among the other abrahamic religions and has claimed a
lineage of descent from abraham through keturah and sarah additionally bahullh actually did lose a son mrz mihd bahullh
then in prison eulogized his son and connected the subsequent easing of restrictions to his sons dying prayer and
compared it to the intended sacrifice of abrahams son the religion also shares many of the same commonalities of judaism
christianity and islam the religion emphasizes monotheism and believes in one eternal transcendent god the station of
the founders of the major religions as manifestations of god come with revelation as a series of interventions by god in
human history that has been progressive and each preparing the way for the next there is no definitive list of
manifestations of god but bahullh and abdulbah referred to several personages as manifestations they include individuals
generally not recognized by other abrahamic religions krishna zoroaster and buddha and general statements go further to
other cultures ethnographic abrahamic religions some small religions such as samaritanism druzes mandeans rastafari
movement and the bb faith are abrahamic these religions are regional with samaritans largely in israel and the west bank
druze largely in syria lebanon israel and jordan mandeans largely in iraq and rastafari largely in jamaica see also
abrahamites ancient semitic religion center for muslimjewish engagement chrislam christianity and islam christianity and
judaism islam and judaism people of the book notes references further reading bakhos carol the family of abraham jewish
christian and muslim interpretations cambridge ma harvard university press isbn derrida jacques anidjar gil ed acts of
religion new york london routledge isbn assmann jan moses the egyptian the memory of egypt in western monotheism harvard
university press isbn barnett paul jesus the rise of early christianity a history of new testament times intervarsity
press isbn blasi anthony j turcotte paulandr duhaime jean handbook of early christianity social science approaches
rowman altamira isbn de perceval armandpierre caussin calcutta review essai sur lhistoire des arabes avant lislamisme
pendant lpoque de mahomet et jusqu la rduction de toutes les tribus sous la loi musulmane in french paris didot oclc
dodds adam july the abrahamic faiths continuity and discontinuity in christian and islamic doctrine evangelical
quarterly firestone reuven american jewish committee harriet robert heilbrunn institute for international interreligious
understanding children of abraham an introduction to judaism for muslims hoboken nj ktav isbn freedman h trans and simon
maurice ed genesis rabbah land of israel th century reprinted in eg midrash rabbah genesis volume ii london the soncino
press isbn guggenheimer heinrich w seder olam the rabbinic view of biblical chronology trans ed jason aronson northvale
nj kritzeck james sons of abraham jews christians and moslems helicon greenstreet wendy integrating spirituality in
health and social care oxford seattle wa radcliffe isbn johansson warren abrahamic religions pdf in dynes wayne r
encyclopedia of homosexuality new york garland isbn longton joseph fils dabraham in longton joseph fils dabraham sa
brepols i g p and cib maredsous isbn massignon louis les trois prires dabraham pre di tuos les croyants dieu vivant
masumian farnaz life after death a study of the afterlife in world religions oxford oneworld publications isbn reid
barbara e choosing the better part women in the gospel of luke liturgical press scherman nosson ed tanakh voli the torah
stone edition mesorah publications ltd new york smith jonathan z religion religions religious in taylor mark c critical
terms for religious studies university of chicago press pp isbn smith peter an introduction to the bahai faith cambridge
cambridge university press isbn external links reconciling the abrahamic faiths accessed october whats next heaven hell
and salvation in major world religions a sidebyside comparison archive accessed september three faiths one god accessed
october