
the abyssinian bsnin is a breed of domestic shorthaired cat with a distinctive ticked tabby coat in which individual 
hairs are banded with different colors it is named after the country now known as ethiopia from where it was first 
thought to have originated more recent research now places its origins somewhere near the egyptian coast the abyssinian 
has since become one of the most popular breeds of shorthair cat in the usa history the abyssinian cat as it is known 
today was developed in great britain the name abyssinian refers to ethiopia in reference to widelyspread stories of 
british soldiers deployed to north africa in the nineteenth century returning home with kittens purchased from local 
traders however more recent genetic research suggests the breed actually originated in egypt and other areas near the 
coast of the indian ocean where colonists may have purchased animals from wild animal traders the modern breed is 
believed by some to have originated from one female kitten named zula who was taken from alexandria by a british soldier 
and brought to england in however there is no solid link between zula and the cat first listed as an abyssinian in 
description appearance the abyssinian is a slender fineboned mediumsized cat the head is moderately wedge shaped with a 
slight break at the muzzle and nose and chin ideally forming a straight vertical line when viewed in profile they have 
alert relatively large pointed ears the notably expressive eyes are almond shaped and are gold green hazel or copper 
depending on coat color the legs should be long in proportion to a graceful body with small oval paws the tail is 
likewise long and tapering coat and colors abyssinian kittens are born with dark coats that gradually lighten as they 
mature usually over several months the adult coat should not be excessively short and is ideally fine dense and 
closelying silky to the touch the ticked or agouti effect that is the trademark of the breedgenetically a variant of the 
tabby patternshould be uniform over the body although the ridge of the spine and tail back of the hind legs and the pads 
of the paws are always noticeably darker each hair has a light base with three or four bands of additional color growing 
darker towards the tip the base colour should be as clear as possible any extensive intermingling with grey is 
considered a serious fault a tendency to white on the chin is common but likewise must be minimal the typical tabby 
mshaped marking is often found on the forehead the breeds original color standard is a warm deep reddishbrown base with 
black ticking known as usual in the united kingdom and as ruddy elsewhere sorrel also called cinnamon or red a lighter 
coppery base with chocolate brown ticking is a unique mutation of this original pattern other variants have been 
introduced by outcrossings to the burmese and other shorthaired breeds notably blue on a warm beige base and fawn on a 
softer cream base the less common chocolate and lilac are not recognized in the cat fanciers association cfa breed 
standard but have been granted full champion status in the international cat association tica and in the uk the uk also 
recognizes the silver abyssinian in which the base coat is a pure silvery white with black called usual silver blue 
cream or sorrel ticking various other colour combinations are in development including the torbie in which a patched 
tortoiseshell pattern in any of these colors is visible under the tabby banding the breed owes their distinctive coat to 
a dominant mutant gene known as ta the first cat to have its entire genome published was an abyssinian named cinnamon 
temperament abyssinians are a popular breed thanks in large part to their unusual intelligence and generally extroverted 
playful willful personalities they are said to become depressed without constant activity and attention from their 
owners in marked contrast to this outgoing nature and to most other oriental shorthair breeds they tend to be very quiet 
cats with soft voices abyssinians can be difficult to show as some individuals are excessively timid or particularly shy 
of strangers health the breed can be prone to gingivitis which can lead to more serious periodontitis familial renal 
amyloidosis or aa amyloidosis a kidney disorder due to a mutation in the aa amyloid protein gene has been seen in 
abyssinians the abyssinian has had severe problems with blindness caused by a hereditary retinal degeneration due to 
mutations in the rdac gene however the prevalence has been reduced from to less than in in the country of sweden with 
the widespread availability of rdac mutation detection tests and services such as those provided by the uc davis 
veterinary genetics laboratory it is possible to reduce the disease frequency in all populations of abyssinian genetic 
diversity the study the ascent of cat breeds genetic evaluations of breeds and worldwide randombred populations by 
lipinski et al conducted at uc davis by the team led by leading feline geneticist dr leslie lyons found that the 
abyssinian has a low level of genetic diversity a heterozygosity value of within a range of for all breeds studied and 
has genetic markers common to both southeast asian and western breeds indicating that cats from both asia and europe 
were used to create the breed abyssinian in popular culture jake from the cat from outer space the possible breed of the 
mysterious cat cassandra in the cats the musical film in the th episode of the simpsons abyssinian cats are described as 
intelligent cats who are able to change channels on tv jackpot an episode of csi season episode features a blue 
abyssinian named isis as a significant clue script here httpwwwlosingintranslationnettoolboxcsixjackpottxt bbc 
broadcaster desmond carrington has an abyssinian cat called sam and always mentions him in his radio broadcast 
references external links fbrl breed page abyssinian