
acacia ke or kesi known commonly as acacia thorntree whistling thorn or wattle is a genus of shrubs and trees belonging 
to the subfamily mimosoideae of the family fabaceae described by the swedish botanist carl linnaeus in based on the 
african species acacia nilotica many nonaustralian species tend to be thorny whereas the majority of australian acacias 
are not all species are podbearing with sap and leaves often bearing large amounts of tannins and condensed tannins that 
historically found use as pharmaceuticals and preservatives the generic name derives from akakia the name given by early 
greek botanistphysician pedanius dioscorides middle to late first century to the medicinal tree a nilotica in his book 
materia medica this name derives from the greek word for its characteristic thorns akis thorn the species name nilotica 
was given by linnaeus from this trees bestknown range along the nile river the genus acacia previously contained roughly 
species about of them native to australia with the remainder spread around the tropical to warmtemperate regions of both 
hemispheres including europe africa southern asia and the americas see list of acacia species however in the genus was 
divided into five separate genera under the tribe acacieae the genus acacia sensu stricto was retained for the majority 
of the australian species and a few in tropical asia madagascar and pacific islands most of the species outside 
australia and a small number of australian species were reclassified into vachellia and senegalia the two final genera 
acaciella and mariosousa each contains about a dozen species from the americas but see classification below for ongoing 
debate concerning these name changes this article often describes acacias in the older broader sense classification in 
the over species of acacia the traditional circumscription is not monophyletic this discovery has led to the breaking up 
of acacia into five genera along with the muchdebated retypification of the genus with an australian species instead of 
the original african type species an exception to traditional rules of priority that required ratification by the 
international botanical congress that decision has been controversial and debate continues with some taxonomists and 
many other biologists deciding to continue to use the traditional acacia sensu lato circumscription of the genus at 
least for now such use is contrary to decisions by two consecutive international botanical congresses when the genus is 
divided the traditional acacias of africa are now treated in the genera vachellia and senegalia some of the american 
species are placed in acaciella and mariosousa and the majority of species still treated in the genus acacia are 
confined to australia queensland botanist les pedley had proposed the subgenus phyllodineae be renamed racosperma and 
published the binomial names in common parlance the term acacia is occasionally applied to species of the genus robinia 
which also belongs in the pea family robinia pseudoacacia an american species locally known as black locust is sometimes 
called false acacia in cultivation in the united kingdom and throughout europe geography of australian acacias acacias 
in australia probably evolved their fire resistance about million years ago when fossilised charcoal deposits show a 
large increase indicating that fire was a factor even then with no major mountain ranges or rivers to prevent their 
spread the wattles began to spread all over the continent as it dried and fires became more common they began to form 
dry open forests with species of the genera casuarina eucalyptus and callitris cypresspines the southernmost species in 
the genus are acacia dealbata silver wattle acacia longifolia coast wattle or sydney golden wattle acacia mearnsii black 
wattle and acacia melanoxylon blackwood reaching s in tasmania australia australian species are usually called wattles 
while african and american species tend to be known as acacias description the leaves of acacias are compound pinnate in 
general in some species however more especially in the australian and pacific islands species the leaflets are 
suppressed and the leafstalks petioles become vertically flattened in order to serve the purpose of leaves these are 
known as phyllodes the vertical orientation of the phyllodes protects them from intense sunlight since with their edges 
towards the sky and earth they do not intercept light as fully as horizontally placed leaves a few species such as 
acacia glaucoptera lack leaves or phyllodes altogether but instead possess cladodes modified leaflike photosynthetic 
stems functioning as leaves the small flowers have five very small petals almost hidden by the long stamens and are 
arranged in dense globular or cylindrical clusters they are yellow or creamcolored in most species whitish in some or 
even purple acacia purpureopetala or red acacia leprosa scarlet blaze acacia flowers can be distinguished from those of 
a large related genus albizia by their stamens which are not joined at the base also unlike individual mimosa flowers 
those of acacia have more than ten stamens the plants often bear spines especially those species growing in arid regions 
these sometimes represent branches that have become short hard and pungent though they sometimes represent leafstipules 
acacia armata is the kangaroothorn of australia and vachellia erioloba syn acacia eriolobata is the camelthorn of africa 
acacia seeds can be difficult to germinate research has found that immersing the seeds in various temperatures usually 
around c f and manual seed coat chipping can improve growth to around symbiosis in the central american bullthorn 
acaciasvachellia sphaerocephala syn acacia sphaerocephala vachellia cornigera syn acacia cornigera and vachellia 
collinsii syn acacia collinsiisome of the spiny stipules are large swollen and hollow these afford shelter for several 
species of pseudomyrmex ants which feed on extrafloral nectaries on the leafstalk and small lipidrich foodbodies at the 
tips of the leaflets called beltian bodies in return the ants add protection to the plant against herbivores some 
species of ants will also remove competing plants around the acacia cutting off the offending plants leaves with their 
jaws and ultimately killing them other associated ant species appear to do nothing to benefit their hosts similar 
mutualisms with ants occur on acacia trees in africa such as the whistling thorn acacia the acacias provide shelter for 
ants in similar swollen stipules and nectar in extrafloral nectaries for their symbiotic ants such as crematogaster 
mimosae in turn the ants protect the plant by attacking large mammalian herbivores and stemboring beetles that damage 
the plant the predominantly herbivorous spider bagheera kiplingi which is found in central america and mexico feeds on 
nubs at the tips of the acacia leaves known as beltian bodies which contain high concentrations of protein these nubs 
are produced by the acacia as part of a symbiotic relationship with certain species of ant which also eat them pests in 
australia acacia species are sometimes used as food plants by the larvae of hepialid moths of the genus aenetus 
including a ligniveren these burrow horizontally into the trunk then vertically down other lepidoptera larvae which have 
been recorded feeding on acacia include browntail endoclita malabaricus and turnip moth the leafmining larvae of some 
bucculatricid moths also feed on acacia bucculatrix agilis feeds exclusively on vachellia horrida syn acacia horrida and 
bucculatrix flexuosa feeds exclusively on vachellia nilotica syn acacia nilotica acacias contain a number of organic 
compounds that defend them from pests and grazing animals uses use as human food acacia seeds are often used for food 
and a variety of other products in burma laos and thailand the feathery shoots of acacia pennata common name chaom and 
su pout ywet in burmese are used in soups curries omelettes and stirfries gum various species of acacia yield gum true 
gum arabic is the product of senegalia senegal abundant in dry tropical west africa from senegal to northern nigeria 
vachellia nilotica syn acacia arabica is the gum arabic tree of india but yields a gum inferior to the true gum arabic 
gum arabic is used in a wide variety of food products including some soft drinks and confections the ancient egyptians 
used acacia gum in paints uses in folk medicine acacia species have possible uses in folk medicine a thcentury ethiopian 
medical text describes a potion made from an ethiopian species known as grar mixed with the root of the tacha then 
boiled as a cure for rabies an astringent medicine high in tannins called catechu or cutch is procured from several 
species but more especially from senegalia catechu syn acacia catechu by boiling down the wood and evaporating the 
solution so as to get an extract the catechu extract from a catechu figures in the history of chemistry in giving its 
name to the catechin catechol and catecholamine chemical families ultimately derived from it ornamental uses a few 
species are widely grown as ornamentals in gardens the most popular perhaps is a dealbata silver wattle with its 
attractive glaucous to silvery leaves and bright yellow flowers it is erroneously known as mimosa in some areas where it 
is cultivated through confusion with the related genus mimosa another ornamental acacia is the fever tree southern 
european florists use a baileyana a dealbata a pycnantha and a retinodes as cut flowers and the common name there for 
them is mimosa ornamental species of acacias are also used by homeowners and landscape architects for home security the 
sharp thorns of some species deter unauthorized persons from entering private properties and may prevent breakins if 
planted under windows and near drainpipes the aesthetic characteristics of acacia plants in conjunction with their home 
security qualities makes them a considerable alternative to artificial fences and walls perfume vachellia farnesiana syn 
acacia farnesiana is used in the perfume industry due to its strong fragrance the use of acacia as a fragrance dates 
back centuries symbolism and ritual the acacia is used as a symbol in freemasonry to represent purity and endurance of 
the soul and as funerary symbolism signifying resurrection and immortality the tree gains its importance from the 
description of the burial of hiram abiff who provided some of the builders for king solomons temple in jerusalem it is 
also supposed to have been the material used for zulu warriors iziqu or isiku beads which passed on through sir robert 
badenpowell to the boy scout movements wood badge training award egyptian mythology has associated the acacia tree with 
characteristics of the tree of life such as in the myth of osiris and isis several parts mainly bark root and resin of 
acacia species are used to make incense for rituals acacia is used in incense mainly in india nepal and china including 
in its tibet region smoke from acacia bark is thought to keep demons and ghosts away and to put the gods in a good mood 
roots and resin from acacia are combined with rhododendron acorus cytisus salvia and some other components of incense 
both people and elephants like an alcoholic beverage made from acacia fruit according to eastons bible dictionary the 
acacia tree may be the burning bush exodus which moses encountered in the desert also when god gave moses the 
instructions for building the tabernacle he said to make an ark and a table of acacia wood exodus revised standard 
version also in the christian tradition christs crown of thorns is thought to have been woven from acacia in russia 
italy and other countries it is customary to present women with yellow mimosas among other flowers on international 
womens day march these mimosas are actually from a dealbata silver wattle tannin the bark of various australian species 
known as wattles is very rich in tannin and forms an important article of export important species include a pycnantha 
golden wattle a decurrens tan wattle a dealbata silver wattle and a mearnsii black wattle black wattle is grown in 
plantations in south africa and south america most australian acacia species introduced to south africa have become an 
enormous problem due to their naturally aggressive propagation the pods of a nilotica under the name of nebneb and of 
other african species are also rich in tannin and used by tanners wood some acacia species are valuable as timber such 
as a melanoxylon blackwood from australia which attains a great size its wood is used for furniture and takes a high 
polish and a omalophylla myall wood also australian which yields a fragrant timber used for ornaments a seyal is thought 
to be the shittahtree of the bible which supplied shittimwood according to the book of exodus this was used in the 
construction of the ark of the covenant a koa from the hawaiian islands and a heterophylla from runion are both 
excellent timber trees depending on abundance and regional culture some acacia species eg a fumosa are traditionally 
used locally as firewoods it is also used to make homes for different animals pulpwood in indonesia mainly in sumatra 
and in malaysia mainly in sabah plantations of a mangium are being established to supply pulpwood to the paper industry 
acacia wood pulp gives high opacity and below average bulk paper this is suitable in lightweight offset papers used for 
bibles and dictionaries it is also used in paper tissue where it improves softness land reclamation acacias can be 
planted for erosion control especially after mining or construction damage ecological invasion for the same reasons it 
is favored as an erosioncontrol plant with its easy spreading and resilience some varieties of acacia are potentially 
invasive species one of the most globally significant invasive acacias is black wattle a mearnsii which is taking over 
grasslands and abandoned agricultural areas worldwide especially in moderate coastal and island regions where mild 
climate promotes its spread australiannew zealand weed risk assessment gives it a high risk score of rating and it is 
considered one of the worlds most invasive species extensive ecological studies should be performed before further 
introduction of acacia varieties as this fastgrowing genus once introduced spreads fast and is extremely difficult to 
eradicate phytochemistry cyanogenic glycosides nineteen different species of acacia in the americas contain cyanogenic 
glycosides which if exposed to an enzyme which specifically splits glycosides can release hydrogen cyanide in the leaves 
this sometimes results in the poisoning death of livestock if fresh plant material spontaneously produces ppm or more 
hcn then it is potentially toxic this corresponds to about mol hcn per gram of fresh plant material it turns out that if 
acacia leaves lack the specific glycosidesplitting enzyme then they may be less toxic than otherwise even those 
containing significant quantities of cyanic glycosides some acacia species containing cyanogens include acacia erioloba 
a cunninghamii a obtusifolia a sieberiana and a sieberiana var woodii famous acacia perhaps the most famous acacia is 
the arbre du tnr in niger the reason for the trees fame is that it used to be the most isolated tree in the world about 
km mi from any other tree the tree was knocked down by a truck driver in in nairobi kenya the thorn tree caf is named 
after a naivasha thorn tree acacia xanthophloea in its centre travelers used to pin notes to others to the thorns of the 
tree the current tree is the third of the same variety see also list of acacia species plant defense against herbivory 
psychedelic plants notes general references clement ba goff cm forbes tda toxic amines and alkaloids from acacia 
rigidula phytochem dois shulgin alexander and ann tihkal the continuation transform press isbn external links acacia at 
the encyclopedia of life world wide wattle acaciaworld waynes word on the unforgettable acacias the genus acacia and 
entheogenic tryptamines with reference to australian and related species by mulga a description of acacia from pomets 
reference book history of druggs dr dukes phytochemical and ethnobotanical databases flora identification tools from the 
state herbarium of south australia tannins in some interrelated wattles list of acacia species in the us fao timber 
properties of various acacia species fao comparison of various acacia species as forage longterm effects of roller 
chopping on antiherbivore defenses in three shrub species jason r schindlera timothy e fulbright vet path resultsafip 
wednesday slide conference no february acacia cyanophylla lindl as supplementary feedfor small stock in libya 
description of acacia morphology nitrogen fixation in acacias acacias with cyagenic compounds acacia alarm system acacia 
in west african plants a photo guide acacia encyclopdia britannica th ed 