
acanthothoraci spine chests is an extinct group of chimaeralike placoderms who were closely related to the rhenanid 
placoderms superficially the acanthoracids resembled scaly chimaeras or relatively heavily armored ptyctodonts they were 
distinguished from chimaeras by the presence of large scales and plates a pair of large spines that emanate from their 
chests thus the orders name toothlike beak plates and the typical boneenhanced placoderm eyeball they were distinguished 
from other placoderms due to differences in the anatomy of their skulls and due to patterns on the skull plates and 
thoracic plates that are unique to this order fossil record fossils of the acanthothoracids are found in various 
deposits from the lower devonian throughout the world fossils of the palaeacanthaspids are found in eurasia and canada 
while the weejasperaspids have only been found in the taemas wee jasper reef in southeastern australia ecology from what 
can be inferred from the mouthplates of fossil specimens the acanthothoracids were ecologically similar to modernday 
chimaeras being a clique of shellfish hunters competition with their relatives the ptyctodont placoderms may have been 
one of the main reasons for the acanthothoracids extinction prior to the mid devonian extinction event families three 
families have been recognized palaeacanthaspidae is the most widespread of the three families fossils of 
palaeacanthaspids are found in lower devonian strata of europe canada saudi arabia and east asia palaeacanthaspids have 
short rostrums and large nostrils situated dorsally on the forehead almost directly between the eyes they also had stout 
spines emanating from the back of the median dorsal plates of their shouldergirdles and a spine emanating on plates 
directly in front of the pectoral fins dermal plates were decorated with either tubercules or scales with stellate 
patterns weejasperaspididae is restricted to the emsian taemaswee jasper reef in what is now new south wales australia 
compared to the corresponding spines of palaeacanthaspids the spines of weejasperaspids are long and tremendously stout 
the armor of weejasperaspids were decorated with small tubercules hagiangellidae is a monogeneric family currently 
represented by hagiangella goujeti which is restricted to lochkovian strata of the khao loc formation in tung vai ha 
giang province of northern vietnam from what can be discerned from the various scrappy fossils h goujeti had a 
relatively highdomed head especially when compared to the bunshaped heads of other acanthothoracids and had serrations 
on the spines in front of its pectoral fins relation to other placoderms most placoderm experts have reached a consensus 
that acanthothoracida is the sister group of the rest of placodermi save for perhaps stensioella and 
pseudopetalichthyida this is the result of a careful reexamination of the various members of the acanthothoracid family 
palaeacanthaspidae in that particular species within that family share various anatomical similarities with other 
placoderm orders particularly the anatomies of their braincase dermal plate arrangement and bone histology in the genus 
hagianella of the monotypic family hagianellidae was reappraised as possibly being the sistergroup of ptyctodontida due 
to similarities of skull anatomies as a result palaeacanthaspidae and hagianellidae are now considered to be 
paraphyletic due to the similarities their members have to primitive members of other placoderm orders the family 
weejasperaspididae on the other hand is considered to be monophyletic because of the weejasperaspids generalized anatomy 
and strong similarities with the palaeacanthaspids but no overt similarities with any other order save brindabellaspida 
they are regarded as either basal placoderms or very close to the basal placoderm timeline of genera references further 
reading janvier philippe early vertebrates oxford new york oxford university press isbn long john a the rise of fishes 
million years of evolution baltimore the johns hopkins university press isbn sepkoski jack a compendium of fossil marine 
animal genera placodermi entry bulletins of american paleontology p retrieved external links mikkos phylogeny 
archive