
acanthodii or acanthodians sometimes called spiny sharks is a paraphyletic class of extinct fish sharing features with 
both bony fish and cartilaginous fish in form they resembled sharks but their epidermis was covered with tiny rhomboid 
platelets like the scales of holosteans gars bowfins they represent several independent phylogenetic branch of fishes 
leading to the stillextant chondrichthyes the popular name spiny sharks is partial a misnomer for these early jawed 
fishes the name was coined because they were superficially sharkshaped with a streamlined body paired fins and a 
strongly upturned tail stout largely immovable bony spines supporting all the fins except the tail hence spiny sharks in 
retrospect however their close relation to modern cartilaginous fish can lead them to be considered stemsharks 
fossilized spines and scales are often all that remains of these fishes in ancient sedimentary rocks although not sharks 
or cartilaginous fish acanthodians did in fact have a cartilaginous skeleton but their fins had a wide bony base and 
were reinforced on their anterior margin with a dentine spine the earliest acanthodians were marine but during the 
devonian freshwater species became predominant there are three orders recognized climatiiformes ischnacanthiformes and 
acanthodiformes climatiiforma had shoulder armor and many small sharp spines ischnacanthiforma with teeth fused to the 
jaw and the acanthodiforma were filter feeders with no teeth in the jaw but long gill rakers overall the acanthodians 
jaws are presumed to have evolved from the first gill arch of some ancestral jawless fishes that had a gill skeleton 
made of pieces of jointed cartilage characteristics the scales of acanthodii have distinctive ornamentation peculiar to 
each order because of this the scales are often used in determining relative age of sedimentary rock the scales are tiny 
with a bulbous base a neck and a flat or slightly curved diamondshaped crown despite being called spiny sharks 
acanthodians predate sharks scales that have been tentatively identified as belonging to acanthodians or sharklike 
fishes have been found in various ordovician strata though they are ambiguous and may actually belong to jawless fishes 
such as thelodonts the earliest unequivocal acanthodian fossils date from the beginning of the silurian period some 
million years before the first sharks appeared later the acanthodians colonized fresh waters and thrived in the rivers 
and lakes during the devonian and in the coal swamps of carboniferous but the first bony fishes were already showing 
their potential to dominate the waters of the world and their competition proved too much for the spiny sharks which 
died out in permian times approximately mya many paleonthologists originally considered the acanthodians close to the 
ancestors of the bony fishes although their interior skeletons were made of cartilage a bonelike material had developed 
in the skins of these fishes in the form of closely fitting scales see above some scales were greatly enlarged and 
formed a bony covering on top of the head and over the lower shoulder girdle others developed a bony flap over the gill 
openings analogous to the operculum in later bony fishes however most of these characteristics are considered homologous 
characteristics derived form common placoderm ancestors and present also in basal cartilaginous fish taxonomy and 
phylogeny in a study of early jawed vertebrate relationships davis et al found acanthodians to be split among the two 
major clades osteichthyes bony fish and chondrichthyes cartilaginous fish the wellknown acanthodian acanthodes was 
placed within osteichthyes despite the presence of many chondrichthyan characteristics in its braincase however a newly 
described silurian placoderm entelognathus which has jaw anatomy shared with bony fish and tetrapods has lead to 
revisions of his phylogeny acanthodians are now considered to be a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish 
while bony fish evolved from placoderm ancestors references further reading bene josef prehistoric animals and plants 
new york hamlyn isbn janvier phillipe early vertebrates oxford clarendon press isbn long john a the rise of fishes 
million years of evolution baltimore johns hopkins university press isbn palmer douglas ed the simon schuster 
encyclopedia of dinosaurs prehistoric creatures a visual whos who of prehistoric life new york simon schuster isbn 
external links acanthodii taxonomy ischnacanthiformes taxonomy climatiiformes taxonomy acanthodiformes taxonomy 
ischnacanthus gracilis a devonian fish by neal robbins palaeozoic fish uk archived from the original on acanthodopsis 
wardi