
acari or acarina are a taxon of arachnids that contains mites and ticks the diversity of the acari is extraordinary and 
its fossil history goes back to at least the early devonian period as a result acarologists the people who study mites 
and ticks have proposed a complex set of taxonomic ranks to classify mites in most modern treatments the acari is 
considered a subclass of arachnida and is composed of two or three superorders or orders acariformes or actinotrichida 
parasitiformes or anactinotrichida and opilioacariformes the latter is often considered a subgroup within the 
parasitiformes the monophyly of the acari is open to debate and the relationships of the acarines to other arachnids is 
not at all clear in older treatments the subgroups of the acarina were placed at order rank but as their own 
subdivisions have become betterunderstood it is more usual to treat them at superorder rank most acarines are minute to 
small eg millimetre or inches but the largest acari some ticks and red velvet mites may reach lengths of millimetres in 
over species have been described as of and it is estimated that a million or more species may exist the study of mites 
and ticks is called acarology from greek akari a type of mite and logia and the leading scientific journals for 
acarology include acarologia experimental and applied acarology and the international journal of acarology morphology 
mites are arachnids and as such evolved from a segmented body with the segments organised into two tagmata a prosoma 
cephalothorax and an opisthosoma abdomen however only the faintest traces of primary segmentation remain in mites the 
prosoma and opisthosoma are insensibly fused and a region of flexible cuticle the cirumcapitular furrow separates the 
chelicerae and pedipalps from the rest of the body this anterior body region is called the capitulum or gnathosoma and 
according to some workers is also found in ricinulei the remainder of the body is called the idiosoma and is unique to 
mites most adult mites have four pairs of legs like other arachnids but some have fewer for example gall mites like 
phyllocoptes variabilis family eriophyidae have a wormlike body with only two pairs of legs some parasitic mites have 
only one or three pairs of legs in the adult stage larval and prelarval stages have a maximum of three pairs of legs 
adult mites with only three pairs of legs may be called larviform the mouth parts of mites may be adapted for biting 
stinging sawing or sucking they breathe through tracheae stigmata small openings of the skin intestines and the skin 
itself species hunting for other mites have very acute senses but many mites are eyeless the central eyes of arachnids 
are always missing or they are fused into a single eye thus any eye number from none to five may occur ontogeny acarine 
ontogeny typically consists of an egg a prelarval stage often absent a larval stage hexapod except in eriophyoidea which 
have only two pairs of legs and a series of nymphal stages any or all of these stages except the adult may be suppressed 
or occur only within the body of a previous stage larvae and prelarvae have a maximum of three pairs of legs legs are 
often reduced to stubs or absent in prelarvae legs iv are added at the first nymphal stage usually a maximum of three 
nymphal stages are present and they are referred to in sequence as the protonymph deutonymph and tritonymph however some 
soft ticks have supernumerary nymphal stages the females of some tarsonemidae bear sexually mature young if one or more 
nymphal stages are absent then authors may disagree on which stages are present only the oribatida pass through all 
developmental stages diversity and lifestyles acarines are extremely diverse they live in practically every habitat and 
include aquatic freshwater and sea water and terrestrial species they outnumber other arthropods in the soil organic 
matter and detritus many are parasitic and they affect both vertebrates and invertebrates most parasitic forms are 
external parasites while the free living forms are generally predatory and may even be used to control undesirable 
arthropods others are detritivores that help to break down forest litter and dead organic matter such as skin cells 
others still are plant feeders and may damage crops economic importance damage to crops is perhaps the most costly 
economic effect of mites especially by the spider mites and their relatives tetranychoidea earth mites penthaleidae 
threadfooted mites tarsonemidae and the gall and rust mites eriophyidae some parasitic forms affect humans and other 
mammals causing damage by their feeding and can even be vectors of diseases such as scrub typhus rickettsialpox lyme 
disease q fever colorado tick fever tularemia tickborne relapsing fever babesiosis ehrlichiosis and tickborne 
meningoencephalitis a well known effect of mites on humans is their role as an allergen and the stimulation of asthma in 
people affected by respiratory disease the use of predatory mites eg phytoseiidae in pest control and herbivorous mites 
that infest weeds are also of importance an unquantified but major positive contribution of the acari is their normal 
functioning in ecosystems especially their roles in the decomposer subsystem chemical agents used to control ticks and 
mites include dusting sulfur and ivermectin taxonomy the phylogeny of the acari is still disputed and several taxonomic 
schemes have been proposed for their classification the third edition of the standard textbook a manual of acarology 
uses a system of six orders grouped into two superorders superorder parasitiformes ticks and a variety of mites 
opilioacarida mites that superficially resemble harvestmen opiliones hence their name holothyrida ixodida hard and soft 
ticks mesostigmata bird mites phytoseiid mites raubmilben sejoidea trigynaspida monogynaspida superorder acariformes the 
most diverse group of mites trombidiformes plant parasitic mites spider mites peacock mites gall mites redlegged earth 
mites etc snout mites chiggers hair follicle mites velvet mites water mites etc sphaerolichida prostigmata 
sarcoptiformes endeostigmata basal sarcoptiform lineages oribatida oribatid mites beetle mites armored mites also 
cryptostigmata astigmata stored product fur feather dust and human itch mites etc recent genetic research has caused a 
change in the naming scheme however and recent publications have changed the superorder parasitiformes to an order 
references further reading wojciech niedbala phthiracaroidea acari oribatida systematic studies warsaw pwn amsterdam 
elsevier isbn experimental and applied acarology issn electronic paper springer e baker an introduction to acarology new 
york the macmillan company t woolley acarology mites and human welfare new york wiley interscience isbn r b halliday d e 
walter h c proctor r a norton m j colloff acarology proceedings of the th international congress july collingwood vic 
csiro publ pp pp isbn d e walter h c proctor mites in soil an interactive key to mites and other soil microarthropods 
abrs identification series csiro publishing collingwood victoria gerald w krantz d e walter ed a manual of acarology rd 
ed texas tech university press isbn external links david evans walter gerald krantz evert lindquist december acari the 
mites tree of life web project heather proctor august acariformes the mitelike mites tree of life web project david 
evans walter december parasitiformes holothyrans ticks and mesostigmatic mites tree of life web project mark harvey 
heather proctor key to families and subfamilies of water mites hydracarina in australia david evans walter september 
invasive mite identification colorado state university ft collins co usdaaphisppq center for plant health science and 
technology raleigh nc noninvasive dvisualization with submicron resolution using synchrotronxraytomography a nice 
website wwwacaribe introduces the acari world in all its amazing variety