
the acariformes are the more diverse of the two superorders of mites over described species are found in families and an 
estimated total of to species occur including undescribed species systematics and taxonomy the acariformes can be 
divided into two main clades sarcoptiformes and trombidiformes in addition a paraphyletic group containing primitive 
forms the endeostigmata was formerly also considered distinct the latter is composed of only families of littlestudied 
minute softbodied mites that ingest solid food such as fungi algae and softbodied invertebrates such as nematodes 
rotifers and tardigrades these clades were formerly considered suborders but this does not allow for a sufficiently 
precise classification of the mites and is abolished in more modern treatments the endeostigmata are variously 
considered to form a suborder on their own the old view or are included mainly in the sarcoptiformes thus making both 
groups monophyletic another group often mentioned is the actinedida but in treatments like the present one this is split 
up between the sarcoptiformes and formerly the separate endostigmata and trombidiformes which contains the bulk of the 
actinedida because it appears to be a massively paraphyletic wastebin taxon uniting all acariformes that are not typical 
oribatida and astigmata the trombidiformes present their own problems the small group sphaerolichida appears to be the 
most ancient lineage among them however the prostigmata are variously subdivided into the anystina and eleutherengona 
and eupodina the delimitation and interrelationships of these groups are entirely unclear while most analyses find one 
of the latter two but not the other to be a subgroup of the anystina neither of these mutually contradicting hypotheses 
is very robust possibly this is a simple error because phylogenetic software usually fails in handling nondichotomous 
phylogenies consequently it may be best for the time being to consider each of the three main prostigmatan lineages to 
be equally distinct from the other two diversity the sarcoptiformes ingest solid food being mainly microherbivores 
fungivores and detritivores some astigmata the psoroptida have become associated with vertebrates and nestbuilding 
insects these include the well known house dust mites scab mites and mange mites stored product mites feather mites and 
some fur mites the relationships between their main groups are not wellresolved and subject to revision in particular it 
appears as if the oribatida need to be split up in two as the astigmata are closer to some of them eg certain 
desmonomata than the latter are to other oribatida the trombidiformes are most noted for the economic damage caused by 
many plant parasite species all of the most important plant pests among the acari are trombidiformans such as spider 
mites tetranychidae and eriophyidae many species are also predators fungivores and animal parasites some of the most 
conspicuous species of freeliving mites are the relatively large and bright red velvet mites that belong to the family 
trombidiidae oribatid mites and to a much lesser extent others are a source of alkaloids in poison frogs namely small 
species like the strawberry poisondart frog oophaga pumilio such frogs raised without these orbatids in their diets do 
not develop the strong poisons associated with them in the wild examples sarcoptiformes cheese mites epidermoptidae 
gastronyssidae sarcoptes scabiei trombidiformes demodex mite eriophyidae plant parasites eg acalitus essigi redberry 
mite erythraeidae labidostommatidae polydiscia deuterosminthurus smarididae spider mites eg tetranychus urticae 
tarsonemidae a number of which are plant pests eg acarapis woodi tydeidae references further reading david walter 
heather proctor mites ecology evolution and behaviour cabi publishing isbn 