
the accipitridae one of the four families within the order accipitriformes the other order of diurnal birds of prey 
being falconiformes are a family of small to large birds with strongly hooked bills and variable morphology based on 
diet they feed on a range of prey items from insects to mediumsized mammals with a number feeding on carrion and a few 
feeding on fruit the accipitridae have a cosmopolitan distribution being found on all the worlds continents except 
antarctica and a number of oceanic island groups some species are migratory many wellknown birds such as hawks eagles 
kites harriers and old world vultures are included in this group the osprey is usually placed in a separate family 
pandionidae as is the secretary bird sagittariidae and the new world vultures are also usually now regarded as a 
separate family or order karyotype data indicate the accipitrids analysed are indeed a distinct monophyletic group but 
whether this group should be considered a family or one or several orders on their own is a question still to be 
resolved systematics the accipitrids have been variously divided into some five to subfamilies most share a very similar 
morphology but many of these groups contain taxa which are more aberrant these are placed in their respective position 
more for lack of better evidence than anything else it is thus not very surprising that the phylogenetic layout of the 
accipitrids has always been a matter of dispute the accipitrids are recognizable by a peculiar rearrangement of their 
chromosomes apart from this morphology and mtdna cytochrome b sequence data give a confusing picture of these birds 
interrelationships what can be said is that the hawks kites eagles and old world vultures as presently assigned in all 
likelihood do not form monophyletic groups according to the molecular data the buteoninae are most likely poly or 
paraphyletic with the true eagles the sea eagles and the buteonine hawks apparently representing distinct lineages these 
appear to form a group with the milvinae accipitrinae and circinae but the exact relationships between the lineages are 
not at all robustly resolvable with the present data the perninae and possibly the elaninae are older lineages as are 
the old world vultures the latter are fairly likely also poly or paraphyletic with some aberrant species like the 
bearded and egyptian vultures standing apart from the nakednecked true vultures morphology the accipitridae are a 
diverse family with a great deal of variation in size and shape they range in size from the tiny pearl kite gampsonyx 
swainsonii and little sparrowhawk accipiter minullus both of which are cm in in length and weigh about g oz to the 
cinereous vulture aegypius monachus which measures up to cm in and weighs up to kg lbs wingspan can vary from cm in in 
the little sparrowhawk to more than cm in in the cinereous and himalayan vultures gyps himalayensis in these extreme 
species wing chord length can range from to mm to in and culmen length from to mm to in until the th century even these 
huge vultures were surpassed by the extinct haasts eagle harpagornis moorei of new zealand which is estimated to have 
measured up to cm in and to have weighed to kg to lb in the largest females in terms of body mass the accipitridae are 
the most diverse family of birds and may also be in terms of some aspects of linear size diversity although lag behind 
the true parrots and pheasant family in length diversity most accipitrids exhibit sexual dimorphism in size although 
unusually for birds it is the females that are larger than the males this sexual difference in size is most pronounced 
in active species that hunt birds such as the accipiter hawks in which the size difference averages in a majority of 
species such as generalist hunters and rodent reptile fish and insecthunting specialists the dimorphism is less usually 
between a to size difference in the carrioneating old world vultures and snail eating kites the difference is almost 
nonexistent the beaks of accipitrids are strong and hooked sometimes very hooked as in the hookbilled kite or snail kite 
in some species there is a notch or tooth in the upper mandible in all accipitrids the base of the upper mandible is 
covered by a fleshy membrane called the cere which is usually yellow in colour the tarsi of different species vary by 
diet those of birdhunting species such as sparrowhawks are long and thin whilst species that hunt large mammals have 
much thicker stronger tarsi and the tarsi of the snakeeagles have thick scales to protect from bites the plumage of the 
accipitridae can be striking but rarely utilises bright colours most birds use combinations of grey buff and brown 
overall they tend to be paler below which helps them seem less conspicuous when seen from below there is seldom sexual 
dimorphism in plumage when it occurs the males are brighter or the females resemble juveniles in many species juveniles 
have a distinctly different plumage some accipitrids mimic the plumage patterns of other hawks and eagles they may 
attempt to resemble a less dangerous species to fool prey or instead resemble a more dangerous species in order to 
reduce mobbing by other birds several species of accipitrid have crests used in signalling and even species without 
crests can raise the feathers of the crown when alarmed or excited in contrast most of the old world vultures possess 
bare heads without feathers this is thought to prevent soiling on the feathers and aid in thermoregulation the senses of 
the accipitridae are adapted to hunting or scavenging and in particular their vision is legendary the sight of some 
hawks and eagles is up to times better than that of humans large eyes with two fovea provide binocular vision and a hawk 
eye for movement and distance judging in addition they have the largest pectens of any birds the eyes are tube shaped 
and cannot move much in their sockets in addition to excellent vision many species have excellent hearing but unlike in 
owls sight is generally the principal sense used for hunting hearing may be used to locate prey hidden in vegetation but 
sight is still used to catch the prey like most birds the accipitridae generally have a poor sense of smell even the old 
world vultures make no use of the sense in contrast to the new world vultures in the family cathartidae diet and 
behavior accipitrids are predominately predators and most species actively hunt for their prey prey is usually captured 
and killed in the powerful talons of the raptor and then carried off to be torn apart with a hooked bill for eating or 
feeding to nestlings a majority of accipitrids are opportunistic predators that will take any prey that they can kill 
however most have a preference for a certain type of prey which in harriers and the numerous buteonine hawks including 
more than species in the buteo genus tends towards small mammals such as rodents among the raptors that mainly favor 
small mammals harriers generally hunt by hovering over openings until they detect their prey and descend upon them due 
to the specificity of their hunting style prey preferences and habitat preferences usually only one harrier species 
tends to be found per region buteonine hawks usually watch for prey from a perch but most species will also readily hunt 
on the wing including from a high soar many buteonines are amongst the most generalized feeders often feeding on any 
active small animal they find and will generally eat whatever diurnal rodent or lagomorph is most locally common 
although some buteonines are more specialized such as some species in the buteogallus genus which have evolved to 
specialize in feeding on crabs larger buteogallus namely the solitary eagles and geranoaetus are much larger than other 
buteonines and seem to have become avian apex predators of specific habitat niches ie savanna cloud forest and pramo in 
south america and are thus honorary eagles in accipiter hawks the most speciesrich accipitrid genus with nearly extant 
species prey is mainly other birds accipiters are in general forest and thicket dwelling species accipiter hawks usually 
ambush birds in dense vegetation a dangerous hunting method that requires great agility many smaller tropical species of 
accipiter eat nearly equal portions of insects and reptiles and amphibians as they do of birds while some of the larger 
species have become more generalized and may feed extensively on rodents and lagomorphs as well as other various 
nonavian animals most accipitrids will supplement their diet with nonputrid carrion but of course none specialized with 
this as well as the species of vultures which have evolved very large bodies which leave them equipped to fill their 
crop with carrion weaker less specialized feet relative to other accipitrids large wingspans to spend extensively 
periods of time in flight over openings scanning for carcasses and complex social behavior in order to establish a mixed 
species hierarchy at carrion the new world vultures have attained several similar characteristics but only through 
covergent evolution and are seemingly not directly related to old world vultures and other accipitrids the lammergeier 
gypaetus barbatus is an aberrant cousin of the old world vultures that has maintained strong feet in order to carry and 
drop large bones in order to crack them open to feed on bone marrow their primary food a technique they also sometimes 
use for live prey items like tortoises a few species may opportunistically feed on fruit and in one species the palmnut 
vulture gypohierax angolensis possibly not closely related to other vultures it may form more than half of the diet most 
accipitrids will not eat plant material insects are taken exclusively by around species in great numbers by additional 
species and opportunistically by a great many others the diet of the honeybuzzards includes not only the adults and 
young of social insects such as wasps and bees but the honey and combs from their nests the snail kite rostrhamus 
sociabilis slenderbilled kite helicolestes hamatus and hookbilled kites chondrohierax uncinatus are specialists in 
consuming snails which usually constitute of their diet other kites are divided into two groups a loose assemblance of 
smallish raptors many of which are strong fliers one exclusively in the old world milvine or large kites are relatively 
large often quite common very generalized and often weakly predaceous feeders whereas the other kites also known as 
elanine or small kites and mostly found in the new world are supremely aerial active hunters that generally alternate 
their primary food between insects and small mammals one species allied with the latter kite group the bat hawk 
macheiramphus alcinus has come to specialize in hunting bats eagles are several raptors that are not necessarily closely 
related but can be broadly defined by large body size larger than other raptors excluding vultures and the taking of 
typically larger prey including midsized mammals and larger birds the most diverse group of eagles is the booted eagles 
a variable group of approximately species defined by their feathering covering their legs shared by only a couple of 
buteonine species most accipitrids usually hunt prey rather smaller than themselves however many accipitrids of almost 
all sizes have been recorded as capturing and then flying with prey of equal weight or even slightly heavier than 
themselves in their talons a feat that requires great physical strength occasionally an eagle or other raptor that kills 
prey considerably heavier than itself too heavy for the raptor to carry and fly with will then have to leave prey where 
theyve killed and later return repeatedly to feed or dismember and bring to a perch or nest piece by piece this has the 
advantage of providing a surplus of food but has the disadvantage of potentially attracting scavengers or other 
predators which can steal the kill or even attack the feeding accipitrid using this method accipitrids such as the 
golden aquila chrysaetos wedgetailed aquila rapax martial polemaetus bellicosus and crowned eagles stephanoaetus 
coronatus have successfully hunted ungulates such as deer and antelope and other large mammals kangaroos and emus in the 
wedgetailed weighing more than kg lb times their own mass more typical prey for these powerful booted eagle species 
weigh between and kg and lb the haliaeetus eagles the ichthyophaga eagles and the osprey pandion haliaetus possibly in 
its own monotypical family mainly prefer to prey on fish comprising more than of food for the latter genera these large 
acciptrids may supplement their diets with aquatic animals other than fish especially the more generalized haliaeetus 
eagles which also hunt large numbers of water birds and are expert kleptoparasites reptiles and amphibians are hunted by 
almost all variety of acciptrids when the opportunity arises and may be favored over other prey by some eagles ie 
spizaetus hawkeagles and the eagles in buteogallus and several species of buteonine hawks found in the tropics bazas and 
forest hawks in the genus accipiter may take reptiles from trees whilst other species may hunt them on the ground snakes 
are the primary prey of the snakeeagles circaetus and serpenteagles spilornis and dryotriorchis apparently the 
mammalhunting huge and endangered philippine eagle pithecophaga jefferyi is most closely related to the snake eagles 
another handsome aberration of the snakeeagle lineage although unlike the philippine has long been known to be a 
snakeeagle is the bateleur terathopius ecaudatus which has evolved unusually bright plumage in adults with a huge red 
cere red feet bright yellow bill and boldly contrasting greyandwhite markings over black plumage the bateleur has 
specialized to feed extensively on carrion and almost any other feeding opportunity that presents itself reproductive 
biology and populations in terms of their reproductive biology and sociosexual behavior accipitrids share many 
characteristics with other extant groups of birds that appear to not be directly related to but all of whom have evolved 
to become active predators of other warmblooded creatures some of the characteristics they share with these other groups 
including falcons owls skuas and shrikes are that the female is typically larger than the male extreme devotion for 
breeding pairs to both each other and often a dedicated nesting site strict and often ferocious territorial behavior and 
upon hatching the occasional case of competition amongst nestlings including regular siblicide among several species 
before the onset of the nesting season adult accipitrids often devote a majority of their time to excluding other 
members of their own species and even of other species from their nesting territories in several species this occurs by 
territorial display flights over the border of their breeding ranges in several forest dwelling varieties however 
vocalizations are used to establish territories due to the density of the habitat display flights are apparently 
inpractical while a single devoted breeding pair is considered typical research has revealed that in varied accipitrids 
multiple birds engaging in nesting behavior is more commonly than previously thought some harriers have evolved to 
become polgynous with a single smaller male breeding with and then helping multiple females raise young the most extreme 
known species of accipitrid in terms of sociality is the harriss hawks parabuteo unicinctus which up to seven fullygrown 
birds may hunt nest and brood cooperatively with the additional birds typically being prior years offspring of the two 
most mature hawks unlike the other two larger groups of raptorial birds the owls and most falcons accipitrids typically 
build their own nest nest sites are typically in relatively secure places such as the crook of a large tree or an ample 
cliff ledge and can vary in elevation from the flat ground of prairies or steppe to near the peaks of the tallest 
mountains such as the himalayas accipitrids will readily return to use a nest site repeatedly which has resulted in 
several of the largest birds nests known as a single nest may see decades of use with more material added each breeding 
season the single largest known tree nest known for any animal belong to a bald eagle haliaeetus leucocephalus was found 
to be m ft deep meters ft across and to weigh short tons metric tons some species especially eagles will build multiple 
nests for use in alternating years although they usually use nests they build themselves accipitrids sometimes use 
abandoned nests build by other animals or pirate nests from other birds typically other types of accipitrid compared to 
most other types of birds the stretch from egglaying to independence in young birds is very prolonged in accipitrids the 
breeding season ranges from about two to three months to roughly a year and a half the latter in some of the larger 
tropical eagles species inhabiting temperate ranges as a rule have shorter breeding seasons due to the shorter stretches 
of warm weather that facilitates ready capture of prey usually from to eggs are laid in accipitrids a relatively small 
clutch and some species may lay only one egg in almost all accipitrids eggs are laid at intervals rather than all at 
once and in some larger species the intervals can be several days this results in one of the hatchlings being larger and 
more advanced in development than its siblings the benefits of siblicide which is at least occasionally recorded in many 
species and almost always occurs in some such as tropical members of the booted eagle group is that the smaller siblings 
are a kind of insurance policy that if the oldest strongest nestling dies one of the smaller siblings may take its place 
in most species that have displayed siblicide times of food plenty may result in two or more the nestlings being 
successfully raised to fledging in most accipitrids the smaller males typically attain food both for the incubating and 
brooding female and the nestlings males however occasionally take a shift incubating or even more sporadically of 
brooding of the nestlings which allows the female to hunt most accipitrids feed their nestlings by feeding them strips 
of meat or whole prey items but most vultures feed their nestlings via regurgitation fledgling often takes considerable 
effort for young birds and may take several weeks as opposed to days in many other types of birds once independent of 
their parents young accipitrids often most wander for considerable stretches of time ranging from to years before they 
attain maturity most accipitrids have distinct plumages in their immature stage which presumably serves as a visual cue 
to others of their species and may allow them to avoid territorial fights shortly after attaining mature plumages pairs 
form with a male typically displaying often in flight but sometimes vocally to win over a female many accipitrids breed 
with the same mate for several years or for life although this is not the case for all species and if a mate dies the 
widowed bird will typically try to find another mate the following breeding season genera subfamily elaninae elanid 
kites species genus elanus genus chelictinia genus gampsonyx genus elanoides genus macheiramphus was doubtfully placed 
moved from perninae subfamily perninae honey buzzards c species genus aviceda genus henicopernis genus pernis genus 
leptodon genus chondrohierax subfamily aegypiinae old world vultures genus sarcogyps genus aegypius genus torgos genus 
trigonoceps genus gyps genus necrosyrtes subfamily gypaetinaegenus neophron genus gypohierax genus gypaetus genus 
eutriorchis subfamily buteoninae buteonine hawks true eagles and seaeagles c living species probably poly or 
paraphyletic genus geranoaetus genus buteo probably paraphyletic might include leucopternis in part and parabuteo genus 
parabuteo genus rupornis roadside hawk genus pseudastur genus morphnarchus barred hawk genus buteogallus probably 
paraphyletic might include leucopternis in par genus bermuteo extinct genus busarellus genus leucopternis probably 
polyphyletic genus cryptoleucopteryx plumbeous hawk genus kaupifalco genus butastur genus harpyhaliaetus genus 
geranospiza subfamily aquilinaegenus spizaetus genus nisaetus genus lophaetus possibly junior synonym of ictinaetus 
genus stephanoaetus genus polemaetus genus hieraaetus genus lophotriorchis genus aquila genus clanga genus ictinaetus 
subfamily circinae harriers some living species genus circus subfamily polyboroidinae harrier hawks genus polyboroides 
subfamily milvinae milvine kites some species genus harpagus genus ictinia genus rostrhamus genus helicolestes formerly 
included in rostrhamus genus haliastur genus milvus genus lophoictinia genus hamirostra subfamily accipitrinae goshawks 
sparrowhawks and relatives c living species genus accipiter genus urotriorchis genus erythrotriorchis genus 
megatriorchis subfamily circaetinae snake eagles about one dozen species genus terathopius genus circaetus genus 
spilornis genus pithecophaga subfamily haliaeetinae sea eaglesgenus haliaeetus genus ichthyophaga subfamily 
harpiinaegenus morphnus genus harpia genus harpyopsis subfamily melieraxinaegenus melierax micronisus fossil record as 
with most other birds of prey the fossil record of this group is fairly decent from the latter eocene onwards c mya with 
modern genera being well documented since the early oligocene or around mya milvoides late eocene of england aquilavus 
late eoceneearly oligocene early miocene of france palaeocircus late eoceneearly oligocene of france palaeastur agate 
fossil beds early miocene of sioux county usa pengana early miocene of riversleigh australia promilio agate fossil beds 
early miocene of sioux county usa proictinia early late mioceneearly pliocene of c and se usa neophrontops earlymiddle 
miocene late pleistocene formerly in neophron mioaegypius xiacaowan middle miocene of sihong china apatosagittarius late 
miocene of nebraska usa gansugyps liushu late miocene of china palaeoborus miocene qiluornis miocene of shandong china 
thegornis miocene of argentina garganoaetus early pliocene of gargano peninsula italy amplibuteo late pliocene of peru 
late pleistocene of s north america and cuba may belong to extant genus harpyhaliaetus neogyps palaeohierax includes 
aquila gervaisii accipitrids are known since early eocene times or about from mya onwards in fact but these early 
remains are too fragmentary andor basal to properly assign a place in the phylogeny likewise as remarked above molecular 
methods are of limited value in determining evolutionary relationships of and within the accipitrids what can be 
determined is that in all probability the group originated on either side of the atlantic which during that time was 
only its present width on the other hand as evidenced by fossils like pengana some mya accipitrids in all likelihood 
rapidly acquired a global distribution initially probably even extending to antarctica accipitridae gen et sp indet 
huerfano early eocene of huerfano county usa accipitridae gen et sp indet borgloon early oligocene of hoogbutsel belgium 
accipitridae gen et sp indet bathans earlymiddle miocene of otago new zealand accipitridae gen et sp indet mpefpv puerto 
madryn late miocene of estancia la pastosa argentina aquila danana snake creek late mioceneearly pliocene of loup fork 
usa formerly also geranoaetus or buteo accipitridae gen et sp indet earlymiddle pliocene of kern county usa parabuteo 
accipitridae gen et sp indet late plioceneearly pleistocene of ibiza mediterranean buteo accipitridae gen et sp indet 
egypt specimen amnh fr a left coracoid from the late eocene irdin manha formation of chimney butte inner mongolia was 
initially assessed as a basal midsized buteonine it is today considered to be more likely to belong in the gruiformes 
genus eogrus the early oligocene genus cruschedula was formerly thought to belong to spheniscidae however reexamination 
of the holotype in resulted in the genus being placed in accipitridae further examination in resulted in placement as 
aves incertae sedis footnotes references alcover josep antoni les aus fssils de la cova de ca na reia the fossil birds 
of ca na reia cave pdf endins in catalan with english abstract issn oclc retrieved cs maint unrecognized language link 
amaral karina felipe jorge wilham the chromosomes of the order falconiformes a review pdf ararajuba issn oclc archived 
from the original on april retrieved american museum of natural history amnh amnh fr specimen information archived from 
the original on june retrieved brathwaite d h notes on the weight flying ability habitat and prey of haasts eagle 
harpagornis moorei pdf notornis retrieved cracraft joel notes on fossil hawks accipitridae pdf auk doi retrieved de boer 
l e m karyological heterogeneity in the falconiformes aves cellular and molecular life sciences doibf pmid federico 
concetta cantarella catia daniela scavo cinzia saccone salvatore bedhom bertrand bernardi giorgio avian genomes 
different karyotypes but a similar distribution of the gcrichest chromosome regions at interphase chromosome research 
dois pmid fergusonlees james christie david a raptors of the world illustrated by kim franklin david mead and philip 
burton houghton mifflin isbn del hoyo j elliott a sargatal j eds handbook of the birds of the world barcelona lynx 
edicions isbn lerner heather r l mindell david p november phylogeny of eagles old world vultures and other accipitridae 
based on nuclear and mitochondrial dna molecular phylogenetics and evolution doijympev issn pmid retrieved may miller l 
h bird remains from the kern river pliocene of california pdf condor doi jstor retrieved negro j j two aberrant 
serpenteagles may be visual mimics of birdeating raptors ibis doijxx paton p w c messina f j griffin c r a phylogenetic 
approach to reversed size dimorphism in diurnal raptors oikos doi shiu h j tokita k i morishita e hiraoka e wu y 
nakamura h higuchi h route and site fidelity of two migratory raptors greyfaced buzzards butastur indicus and 
honeybuzzards pernis apivorus ornithological science doiosj smith richard les vertbrs terrestres de loligocne infrieur 
de belgique formation de borgloon mp inventaire et interprtation des donnes actuelles early oligocene terrestrial 
vertebrates from belgium borgloon formation mp catalog and interpretation of recent data pdf coloquios de paleontologa 
in french with english abstract e issn oclc archived from the original on june retrieved cs maint unrecognized language 
link thiollay j m family accipitridae hawks and eagles in handbook of the birds of the world del hoyo elliott sargatal 
thomson a l moreau r e feeding habits of the palmnut vulture gypoheerax ibis doijxtbx ward j mccafferty d houston d 
ruxton g why do vultures have bald heads the role of postural adjustment and bare skin areas in thermoregulation journal 
of thermal biology doijjtherbio wink m heidrich p fentzloff c a mtdna phylogeny of sea eagles genus haliaeetus based on 
nucleotide sequences of the cytochrome b gene pdf biochemical systematics and ecology doisx worthy t h tennyson a j d 
jones c mcnamara j a douglas b j miocene waterfowl and other birds from central otago new zealand j syst palaeontol dois 
wetmore alexander fossil birds from mongolia and china american museum novitates retrieved external links accipitridae 
videos on the internet bird collection xenocantoorg accipitridae sounds retrieved dec