
acetic acid sitk systematically named ethanoic acid nok is an organic compound with the chemical formula chcooh also 
written as chcoh or cho it is a colourless liquid that when undiluted is also called glacial acetic acid vinegar is 
roughly acetic acid by volume making acetic acid the main component of vinegar apart from water acetic acid has a 
distinctive sour taste and pungent smell besides its production as household vinegar it is mainly produced as a 
precursor to polyvinylacetate and cellulose acetate although it is classified as a weak acid concentrated acetic acid is 
corrosive and can attack the skin acetic acid is the second simplest carboxylic acid after formic acid and is an 
important chemical reagent and industrial chemical mainly used in the production of cellulose acetate for photographic 
film and polyvinyl acetate for wood glue as well as synthetic fibers and fabrics in households diluted acetic acid is 
often used in descaling agents in the food industry acetic acid is used under the food additive code e as an acidity 
regulator and as a condiment as a food additive it is approved for usage in many countries including canada the european 
union the united states and australia and new zealand the global demand of acetic acid is around million tonnes per year 
mta of which approximately mta is met by recycling the remainder is manufactured from petrochemical feedstock as a 
chemical reagent biological sources of acetic acid are of interest but generally uncompetitive vinegar is dilute acetic 
acid often produced by fermentation and subsequent oxidation of ethanol nomenclature the trivial name acetic acid is the 
most commonly used and preferred iupac name the systematic name ethanoic acid a valid iupac name is constructed 
according to the substitutive nomenclature the name acetic acid derives from acetum the latin word for vinegar and is 
related to the word acid itself glacial acetic acid is a name for waterfree anhydrous acetic acid similar to the german 
name eisessig icevinegar the name comes from the icelike crystals that form slightly below room temperature at c f the 
presence of water lowers its melting point by c a common abbreviation for acetic acid is acoh where ac stands for the 
acetyl group chco acetate chcoo is abbreviated aco the ac is not to be confused with the abbreviation for the chemical 
element actinium to better reflect its structure acetic acid is often written as chcooh chcooh chcooh and chcoh in the 
context of acidbase reactions the abbreviation hac is sometimes used where ac instead stands for acetate acetate is the 
ion resulting from loss of h from acetic acid the name acetate can also refer to a salt containing this anion or an 
ester of acetic acid history vinegar was known early in civilization as the natural result of exposure of beer and wine 
to air because acetic acidproducing bacteria are present globally the use of acetic acid in alchemy extends into the rd 
century bc when the greek philosopher theophrastus described how vinegar acted on metals to produce pigments useful in 
art including white lead lead carbonate and verdigris a green mixture of copper salts including copperii acetate ancient 
romans boiled soured wine to produce a highly sweet syrup called sapa sapa that was produced in lead pots was rich in 
lead acetate a sweet substance also called sugar of lead or sugar of saturn which contributed to lead poisoning among 
the roman aristocracy in the thcentury german alchemist andreas libavius described the production of acetone from the 
dry distillation of lead acetate ketonic decarboxylation the presence of water in vinegar has such a profound effect on 
acetic acids properties that for centuries chemists believed that glacial acetic acid and the acid found in vinegar were 
two different substances french chemist pierre adet proved them identical in german chemist hermann kolbe synthesized 
acetic acid from inorganic compounds for the first time this reaction sequence consisted of chlorination of carbon 
disulfide to carbon tetrachloride followed by pyrolysis to tetrachloroethylene and aqueous chlorination to 
trichloroacetic acid and concluded with electrolytic reduction to acetic acid by most glacial acetic acid was obtained 
from the pyroligneous liquor from distillation of wood the acetic acid was isolated from this by treatment with milk of 
lime and the resulting calcium acetate was then acidified with sulfuric acid to recover acetic acid at that time germany 
was producing tons of glacial acetic acid around of which was used for the manufacture of indigo dye because both 
methanol and carbon monoxide are commodity raw materials methanol carbonylation long appeared to be attractive 
precursors to acetic acid henri dreyfus at british celanese developed a methanol carbonylation pilot plant as early as 
however a lack of practical materials that could contain the corrosive reaction mixture at the high pressures needed atm 
or more discouraged commercialization of these routes the first commercial methanol carbonylation process which used a 
cobalt catalyst was developed by german chemical company basf in in a rhodiumbased catalyst cisrhcoi was discovered that 
could operate efficiently at lower pressure with almost no byproducts us chemical company monsanto company built the 
first plant using this catalyst in and rhodiumcatalyzed methanol carbonylation became the dominant method of acetic acid 
production see monsanto process in the late s the chemicals company bp chemicals commercialized the cativa catalyst 
ircoi which is promoted by iridium for greater efficiency this iridiumcatalyzed cativa process is greener and more 
efficient and has largely supplanted the monsanto process often in the same production plants in the interstellar medium 
acetic acid was discovered in the interstellar medium in by a team led by david mehringer who detected it using the 
former berkeleyillinoismaryland association array at the hat creek radio observatory and the former millimeter array 
located at the owens valley radio observatory it was first detected in the sagittarius b north molecular cloud also 
known as the sgr b large molecule heimat source acetic acid has the distinction of being the first molecule discovered 
in the interstellar medium using solely radio interferometers in all previous ism molecular discoveries made in the 
millimeter and centimeter wavelength regimes single dish radio telescopes were at least partly responsible for the 
detections chemical properties acidity the hydrogen center in the carboxyl group cooh in carboxylic acids such as acetic 
acid can separate from the molecule by ionization chcoh chco h because of this release of the proton h acetic acid has 
acidic character acetic acid is a weak monoprotic acid in aqueous solution it has a pka value of its conjugate base is 
acetate chcoo a m solution about the concentration of domestic vinegar has a ph of indicating that merely of the acetic 
acid molecules are dissociated structure in solid acetic acid the molecules form pairs dimers being connected by 
hydrogen bonds the dimers can also be detected in the vapour at c f dimers also occur in the liquid phase in dilute 
solutions in nonhydrogenbonding solvents and a certain extent in pure acetic acid but are disrupted by hydrogenbonding 
solvents the dissociation enthalpy of the dimer is estimated at kjmol and the dissociation entropy at j mol k other 
lower carboxylic acids dimerize in a similar fashion solvent properties liquid acetic acid is a hydrophilic polar protic 
solvent similar to ethanol and water with a moderate relative static permittivity dielectric constant of it dissolves 
not only polar compounds such as inorganic salts and sugars but also nonpolar compounds such as oils and elements such 
as sulfur and iodine it readily mixes with other polar and nonpolar solvents such as water chloroform and hexane with 
higher alkanes starting with octane acetic acid is not completely miscible anymore and its miscibility continues to 
decline with longer nalkanes this dissolving property and miscibility of acetic acid makes it a widely used industrial 
chemical for example as a solvent in the production of dimethyl terephthalate chemical reactions organic chemistry 
acetic acid undergoes the typical chemical reactions of a carboxylic acid upon treatment with a standard base it 
converts to metal acetate and water with strong bases eg organolithium reagents it can be doubly deprotonated to give 
lichcoli reduction of acetic acid gives ethanol the oh group is the main site of reaction as illustrated by the 
conversion of acetic acid to acetyl chloride other substitution derivatives include acetic anhydride this anhydride is 
produced by loss of water from two molecules of acetic acid esters of acetic acid can likewise be formed via fischer 
esterification and amides can be formed when heated above c f acetic acid decomposes to produce carbon dioxide and 
methane or to produce ketene and water chcooh ch co chcooh chco ho reactions with inorganic compounds acetic acid is 
mildly corrosive to metals including iron magnesium and zinc forming hydrogen gas and salts called acetates mg chcooh 
chcoomg h because aluminium forms a passivating acidresistant film of aluminium oxide aluminium tanks are used to 
transport acetic acid metal acetates can also be prepared from acetic acid and an appropriate base as in the popular 
baking soda vinegar reaction nahco chcooh chcoona co ho a color reaction for salts of acetic acid is ironiii chloride 
solution which results in a deeply red color that disappears after acidification a more sensitive test uses lanthanum 
nitrate with iodine and ammonia to give a blue solution acetates when heated with arsenic trioxide form cacodyl oxide 
which can be detected by its malodorous vapors biochemistry at physiological phs acetic acid is usually fully ionized to 
acetate the acetyl group derived from acetic acid is fundamental to all forms of life when bound to coenzyme a it is 
central to the metabolism of carbohydrates and fats unlike longerchain carboxylic acids the fatty acids acetic acid does 
not occur in natural triglycerides however the artificial triglyceride triacetin glycerine triacetate is a common food 
additive and is found in cosmetics and topical medicines acetic acid is produced and excreted by acetic acid bacteria 
notable ones being the acetobacter genus and clostridium acetobutylicum these bacteria are found universally in 
foodstuffs water and soil and acetic acid is produced naturally as fruits and other foods spoil acetic acid is also a 
component of the vaginal lubrication of humans and other primates where it appears to serve as a mild antibacterial 
agent production acetic acid is produced industrially both synthetically and by bacterial fermentation about of acetic 
acid made for use in the chemical industry is made by the carbonylation of methanol explained below alternative methods 
account for the rest the biological route accounts for only about of world production but it remains important for the 
production of vinegar as many food purity laws stipulate that vinegar used in foods must be of biological origin as of 
total worldwide production of virgin acetic acid was estimated at mta million tonnes per year approximately half of 
which was then produced in the united states european production stood at approximately mta and was declining and mta 
were produced in japan another mt were recycled each year bringing the total world market to mta since then the global 
production has increased to mta in and further however slowing increase in production is predicted the two biggest 
producers of virgin acetic acid are celanese and bp chemicals other major producers include millennium chemicals 
sterling chemicals samsung eastman and svensk etanolkemi methanol carbonylation most acetic acid is produced by methanol 
carbonylation in this process methanol and carbon monoxide react to produce acetic acid according to the equation choh 
co chcooh the process involves iodomethane as an intermediate and occurs in three steps a catalyst metal carbonyl is 
needed for the carbonylation step choh hi chi ho chi co chcoi chcoi ho chcooh hi two related processes for the 
carbonylation of methanol the rhodiumcatalyzed monsanto process and the iridiumcatalyzed cativa process the latter 
process is greener and more efficient and has largely supplanted the former process often in the same production plants 
catalytic amounts of water are used in both processes but the cativa process requires less so the watergas shift 
reaction is suppressed and fewer byproducts are formed by altering the process conditions acetic anhydride may also be 
produced on the same plant using the rhodium catalysts acetaldehyde oxidation prior to the commercialization of the 
monsanto process most acetic acid was produced by oxidation of acetaldehyde this remains the secondmostimportant 
manufacturing method although it is usually uncompetitive with the carbonylation of methanol the acetaldehyde may be 
produced via oxidation of butane or light naphtha or by hydration of ethylene when butane or light naphtha is heated 
with air in the presence of various metal ions including those of manganese cobalt and chromium peroxides form and then 
decompose to produce acetic acid according to the chemical equation ch o chcooh ho the typical reaction is conducted at 
temperatures and pressures designed to be as hot as possible while still keeping the butane a liquid typical reaction 
conditions are c f and atm sideproducts may also form including butanone ethyl acetate formic acid and propionic acid 
these sideproducts are also commercially valuable and the reaction conditions may be altered to produce more of them 
where needed however the separation of acetic acid from these byproducts adds to the cost of the process under similar 
conditions and using similar catalysts as are used for butane oxidation the oxygen in air to produce acetic acid can 
oxidize acetaldehyde chcho o chcooh using modern catalysts this reaction can have an acetic acid yield greater than the 
major sideproducts are ethyl acetate formic acid and formaldehyde all of which have lower boiling points than acetic 
acid and are readily separated by distillation ethylene oxidation acetaldehyde may be prepared from ethylene via the 
wacker process and then oxidized as above in more recent times chemical company showa denko which opened an ethylene 
oxidation plant in ita japan in commercialized a cheaper singlestage conversion of ethylene to acetic acid the process 
is catalyzed by a palladium metal catalyst supported on a heteropoly acid such as tungstosilicic acid it is thought to 
be competitive with methanol carbonylation for smaller plants kta depending on the local price of ethylene the approach 
will be based on utilizing a novel selective photocatalytic oxidation technology for the selective oxidation of ethylene 
and ethane to acetic acid unlike traditional oxidation catalysts the selective oxidation process will use uv light to 
produce acetic acid at ambient temperatures and pressure oxidative fermentation for most of human history acetic acid 
bacteria of the genus acetobacter have made acetic acid in the form of vinegar given sufficient oxygen these bacteria 
can produce vinegar from a variety of alcoholic foodstuffs commonly used feeds include apple cider wine and fermented 
grain malt rice or potato mashes the overall chemical reaction facilitated by these bacteria is choh o chcooh ho a 
dilute alcohol solution inoculated with acetobacter and kept in a warm airy place will become vinegar over the course of 
a few months industrial vinegarmaking methods accelerate this process by improving the supply of oxygen to the bacteria 
the first batches of vinegar produced by fermentation probably followed errors in the winemaking process if must is 
fermented at too high a temperature acetobacter will overwhelm the yeast naturally occurring on the grapes as the demand 
for vinegar for culinary medical and sanitary purposes increased vintners quickly learned to use other organic materials 
to produce vinegar in the hot summer months before the grapes were ripe and ready for processing into wine this method 
was slow however and not always successful as the vintners did not understand the process one of the first modern 
commercial processes was the fast method or german method first practised in germany in in this process fermentation 
takes place in a tower packed with wood shavings or charcoal the alcoholcontaining feed is trickled into the top of the 
tower and fresh air supplied from the bottom by either natural or forced convection the improved air supply in this 
process cut the time to prepare vinegar from months to weeks nowadays most vinegar is made in submerged tank culture 
first described in by otto hromatka and heinrich ebner in this method alcohol is fermented to vinegar in a continuously 
stirred tank and oxygen is supplied by bubbling air through the solution using modern applications of this method 
vinegar of acetic acid can be prepared in only hours in batch process even in hour fedbatch process anaerobic 
fermentation species of anaerobic bacteria including members of the genus clostridium or acetobacterium can convert 
sugars to acetic acid directly without using ethanol as an intermediate the overall chemical reaction conducted by these 
bacteria may be represented as cho chcooh these acetogenic bacteria produce acetic acid from onecarbon compounds 
including methanol carbon monoxide or a mixture of carbon dioxide and hydrogen co h chcooh ho this ability of 
clostridium to utilize sugars directly or to produce acetic acid from less costly inputs means that these bacteria could 
potentially produce acetic acid more efficiently than ethanoloxidizers like acetobacter however clostridium bacteria are 
less acidtolerant than acetobacter even the most acidtolerant clostridium strains can produce vinegar of only a few per 
cent acetic acid compared to acetobacter strains that can produce vinegar of up to acetic acid at present it remains 
more costeffective to produce vinegar using acetobacter than to produce it using clostridium and then concentrate it as 
a result although acetogenic bacteria have been known since their industrial use remains confined to a few niche 
applications uses acetic acid is a chemical reagent for the production of chemical compounds the largest single use of 
acetic acid is in the production of vinyl acetate monomer closely followed by acetic anhydride and ester production the 
volume of acetic acid used in vinegar is comparatively small vinyl acetate monomer the major use of acetic acid is for 
the production of vinyl acetate monomer vam in this application was estimated to consume one third of the worlds 
production of acetic acid the reaction is of ethylene and acetic acid with oxygen over a palladium catalyst conducted in 
the gas phase hccooh ch o hccoochch ho vinyl acetate can be polymerized to polyvinyl acetate or to other polymers which 
are components in paints and adhesives ester production the major esters of acetic acid are commonly used solvents for 
inks paints and coatings the esters include ethyl acetate nbutyl acetate isobutyl acetate and propyl acetate they are 
typically produced by catalyzed reaction from acetic acid and the corresponding alcohol hccooh hor hccoor ho r a general 
alkyl group most acetate esters however are produced from acetaldehyde using the tishchenko reaction in addition ether 
acetates are used as solvents for nitrocellulose acrylic lacquers varnish removers and wood stains first glycol 
monoethers are produced from ethylene oxide or propylene oxide with alcohol which are then esterified with acetic acid 
the three major products are ethylene glycol monoethyl ether acetate eea ethylene glycol monobutyl ether acetate eba and 
propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate pma more commonly known as pgmea in semiconductor manufacturing processes 
where it is used as a resist solvent this application consumes about to of worldwide acetic acid ether acetates for 
example eea have been shown to be harmful to human reproduction acetic anhydride the product of the condensation of two 
molecules of acetic acid is acetic anhydride the worldwide production of acetic anhydride is a major application and 
uses approximately to of the global production of acetic acid the main process involves dehydration of acetic acid to 
give ketene at c ketene is thereafter reacted with acetic acid to obtain the anhydride chcoh chco ho chcoh chco chcoo 
acetic anhydride is an acetylation agent as such its major application is for cellulose acetate a synthetic textile also 
used for photographic film acetic anhydride is also a reagent for the production of heroin and other compounds use as 
solvent glacial acetic acid is an excellent polar protic solvent as noted above it is frequently used as a solvent for 
recrystallization to purify organic compounds acetic acid is used as a solvent in the production of terephthalic acid 
tpa the raw material for polyethylene terephthalate pet in about of acetic acid was used for tpa production acetic acid 
is often used as a solvent for reactions involving carbocations such as friedelcrafts alkylation for example one stage 
in the commercial manufacture of synthetic camphor involves a wagnermeerwein rearrangement of camphene to isobornyl 
acetate here acetic acid acts both as a solvent and as a nucleophile to trap the rearranged carbocation glacial acetic 
acid is used in analytical chemistry for the estimation of weakly alkaline substances such as organic amides glacial 
acetic acid is a much weaker base than water so the amide behaves as a strong base in this medium it then can be 
titrated using a solution in glacial acetic acid of a very strong acid such as perchloric acid medical use diluted 
acetic acid is used in physical therapy using iontophoresis vinegar vinegar is typically acetic acid by mass vinegar is 
used directly as a condiment and in the pickling of vegetables and other foods table vinegar tends to be more diluted to 
acetic acid while commercial food pickling employs solutions that are more concentrated the amount of acetic acid used 
as vinegar on a worldwide scale is not large but is by far the oldest and bestknown application other derivatives 
organic or inorganic salts are produced from acetic acid including sodium acetate used in the textile industry and as a 
food preservative e copperii acetate used as a pigment and a fungicide aluminium acetate and ironii acetateused as 
mordants for dyes palladiumii acetate used as a catalyst for organic coupling reactions such as the heck reaction silver 
acetate used as a pesticide substituted acetic acids produced include chloroacetic acid monochloroacetic acid mca 
dichloroacetic acid considered a byproduct and trichloroacetic acid mca is used in the manufacture of indigo dye 
bromoacetic acid which is esterified to produce the reagent ethyl bromoacetate trifluoroacetic acid which is a common 
reagent in organic synthesis amounts of acetic acid used in these other applications together apart from tpa account for 
another of acetic acid use worldwide these applications are however not expected to grow as much as tpa production 
health effects and safety concentrated acetic acid is corrosive to skin and must therefore be handled with appropriate 
care since it can cause skin burns permanent eye damage and irritation to the mucous membranes these burns or blisters 
may not appear until hours after exposure latex gloves offer no protection so specially resistant gloves such as those 
made of nitrile rubber are worn when handling the compound concentrated acetic acid can be ignited with difficulty in 
the laboratory it becomes a flammable risk if the ambient temperature exceeds c f and can form explosive mixtures with 
air above this temperature explosive limits acetic acid is a strong eye skin and mucous membrane irritant prolonged skin 
contact with glacial acetic acid may result in tissue destruction inhalation exposure eight hours to acetic acid vapours 
at ppm could produce some irritation of eyes nose and throat at ppm marked lung irritation and possible damage to lungs 
eyes and skin might result vapour concentrations of ppm cause marked irritation of eyes nose and upper respiratory tract 
and cannot be tolerated these predictions were based on animal experiments and industrial exposure skin sensitization to 
acetic acid is rare but has occurred it has been reported that workers exposed for two or more years to an estimated 
mean acetic acid airborne concentration of ppm there were symptoms of conjunctive irritation upper respiratory tract 
irritation and hyperkeratotic dermatitis exposure to ppm or more is intolerable to most persons and results in intensive 
lacrimation and irritation of the eyes nose and throat with pharyngeal oedema and chronic bronchitis unacclimatized 
humans experience extreme eye and nasal irritation at concentrations in excess of ppm and conjunctivitis from 
concentrations below ppm has been reported in a study of five workers exposed for seven to years to concentrations of to 
ppm at peaks the principal findings were blackening and hyperkeratosis of the skin of the hands conjunctivitis but no 
corneal damage bronchitis and pharyngitis and erosion of the exposed teeth incisors and canines the hazards of solutions 
of acetic acid depend on the concentration the following table lists the eu classification of acetic acid solutions 
solutions at more than acetic acid are handled in a fume hood because of the pungent corrosive vapor dilute acetic acid 
in the form of vinegar is practically harmless however ingestion of stronger solutions is dangerous to human and animal 
life it can cause severe damage to the digestive system and a potentially lethal change in the acidity of the blood due 
to incompatibilities it is recommended to keep acetic acid away from chromic acid ethylene glycol nitric acid perchloric 
acid permanganates peroxides and hydroxyls see also acetic acid data page acetyl group the chco group acids in wine 
references external links international chemical safety card national pollutant inventory acetic acid fact sheet niosh 
pocket guide to chemical hazards method for sampling and analysis cfr table z us permissible exposure limits chemsub 
online acetic acid usage of acetic acid in organic syntheses calculation of vapor pressure liquid density dynamic liquid 
viscosity surface tension of acetic acid acetic acid bound to proteins in the pdb swedish chemicals agency information 
sheet acetic acid storage and handling of glacial acetic acid from the queensland government laboratory manual process 
flow sheet of acetic acid production by the carbonylation of methanol