the achaemenid empire kimnd old persian paarasa prsa new persian c bc also called the first persian empire or 
medopersian empire was an empire based in western asia in iran founded in the th century bce by cyrus the great the 
dynasty draws its name from a hypothetical king achaemenes who would have ruled the persis region between bce and bce
the empire expanded to eventually rule over significant portions of the ancient world which at around bce stretched from 
parts of the balkans bulgaria and thracemacedonia in the west to the indus valley in the east the achaemenid empire 
would eventually control egypt as well it was ruled by a series of hereditary monarchs who found a way to help unify its 
disparate tribes and nationalities by constructing a complex network of roads by the s bce the persians prsa had settled 
in the region in the southwestern portion of the iranian plateau in what came to be known as persis city of persians 
bounded on the west by the tigris river and on the south by the persian gulf this region came to be their heartland it 
was from this region that cyrus the great would advance to defeat the kingdom of media the kingdom of lydia and the 
babylonian empire to form the achaemenid empire at the height of its power after the conquest of ancient egypt the 
empire encompassed approximately million square kilometers spanning three continents asia europe and africa at its 
greatest extent the empire included the modern territories of iran turkey iraq kuwait syria jordan israel palestine 
lebanon all significant population centers of ancient egypt as far west as libya thrace and the ancient kingdom of 
macedonia much of the black sea coastal regions armenia georgia azerbaijan much of central asia afghanistan china 
northern saudi arabia pakistan and parts of oman and the uae in bce it is estimated that million people lived in the 
achaemenid empire according to guinness world records the empire at its peak ruled over of the worlds population the 
highest such figure for any empire in history it is noted in western history as the antagonist of the greek city states 
during the grecopersian wars for emancipation of slaves including the jewish exiles in babylon and for building 
infrastructure such as a postal system and road systems and the use of an official language aramaic throughout its 
territories the empire had a centralised bureaucratic administration under a king and a large professional army and 
civil services inspiring similar systems in later empires the delegation of power to local governments is thought to 
have eventually weakened the kings authority causing resources to be expended in attempts to subdue local rebellions and 
leading to the disunity of the region at the time of alexander the greats invasion in bce this viewpoint however is 
challenged by some modern scholars who argue that the achaemenid empire was not facing any such crisis around the time 
of alexander and that only internal succession struggles within the achaemenid family ever came close to weakening the 
empire alexander an avid admirer of cyrus the great would eventually cause the collapse of the empire and its 
disintegration around bce into what later became the ptolemaic kingdom and seleucid empire in addition to other minor 
territories which gained independence at that time however the persian population of the central plateau continued to 
thrive and eventually reclaimed power by the nd century bce the historical mark of the achaemenid empire went far beyond 
its territorial and military influences and included cultural social technological and religious influences as well many 
athenians adopted achaemenid customs in their daily lives in a reciprocal cultural exchange some being employed by or 
allied to the persian kings the impact of cyrus the greats edict of restoration is mentioned in judeochristian texts and 
the empire was instrumental in the spread of zoroastrianism as far east as china even alexander the great adopted some 
of its customs venerating the persian kings including cyrus the great and receiving proskynesis as they did despite 
macedonian disapproval the persian empire would also set the tone for the politics heritage and history of modern persia 
now called iran history achaemenid timeline astronomical year numbering dates are approximate consult particular article 
for details due to the short duration of their reigns smerdis bce xerxes ii and sogdianus both in bce are not shown 
origin the persian nation contains a number of tribes as listed here the pasargadae maraphii and maspii upon which all 
the other tribes are dependent of these the pasargadae are the most distinguished they contain the clan of the 
achaemenids from which spring the perseid kings other tribes are the panthialaei derusiaei germanii all of which are 
attached to the soil the remainder the dai mardi dropici sagarti being nomadic the persian empire was created by nomadic 
persians who originally referred to themselves as parsua the name persia is a greek and latin pronunciation of the name 
parsua referring to people originating from persis or in persian pars their home territory located north of the persian 
gulf in south western iran despite its success and rapid expansion the achaemenid empire was not the first iranian 
empire as by th century bce another group of ancient iranian peoples had already established the median empire the medes 
had originally been the dominant iranian group in the region rising to power at the end of the th century bc and 
incorporating the persians into their empire the iranian people had arrived in the region circa bce and had initially 
fallen under the domination of the assyrian empire bce however the medes and persians together with the scythians and 
babylonians played a major role in the defeat of the assyrians and establishment of the first persian empire the term 
achaemenid is in fact the latinized version of the old persian name haxmani a bahuvrihi compound translating to having a 
friends mind meaning in greek of the family of the achaemenis despite the derivation of the name achaemenes was himself 
a minor thcentury ruler of the anshan ansham or ann located in southwestern iran it was not until the time of cyrus the 
great cyrus ii of persia a descendant of achaemenes that the achaemenid empire developed the prestige of an empire and 
set out to incorporate the existing empires of the ancient east becoming the vast persian empire of ancient legend at 
some point in bce cyrus the great rose in rebellion against the median empire most likely due to the medes mismanagement 
of persis eventually conquering the medes and creating the first persian empire cyrus the great utilized his tactical 
genius as well as his understanding of the sociopolitical conditions governing his territories to eventually incorporate 
into the persian empire the neighbouring lydian and neobabylonian empires also leading the way for his successor 
cambyses ii to venture into egypt and defeat the egyptian kingdom cyrus the greats political acumen was reflected in his 
management of his newly formed empire as the persian empire became the first to attempt to govern many different ethnic 
groups on the principle of equal responsibilities and rights for all people so long as subjects paid their taxes and 
kept the peace additionally the king agreed not to interfere with the local customs religions and trades of its subject 
states a unique quality that eventually won cyrus the support of the babylonians this system of management ultimately 
became an issue for the persians as with a larger empire came the need for order and control leading to expenditure of 
resources and mobilization of troops to quell local rebellions and weakening the central power of the king by the time 
of darius iii this disorganization had almost led to a disunited realm the persians from whom cyrus hailed were 
originally nomadic pastoral people in the western iranian plateau and by bc were calling themselves the parsa and their 
constantly shifting territory parsua for the most part localized around persis pars as persians gained power they 
developed the infrastructure to support their growing influence including creation of a capital named pasargadae and an 
opulent city named persepolis begun during the rule of darius the great darius i and completed some years later 
persepolis was a symbol of the empire serving both as a ceremonial centre and a center of government it had a special 
set of gradually progressive stairways named all countries around which carved relief decoration depicted scenes of 
heroism hunting natural themes and presentation of the gifts to the achaemenid kings by their subjects during the spring 
festival nowruz the core structure was composed of a multitude of square rooms or halls the biggest of which was called 
apadana tall decorated columns welcomed visitors and emphasized the height of the structure later on darius the great 
darius i also utilized susa and ecbatana as his governmental centres developing them to a similar metropolitan status 
accounts of the ancestral lineage of the persian kings of the achaemenid dynasty can be derived from either documented 
greek or roman accounts or from existing documented persian accounts such as those found in the behistun inscription 
however since most existing accounts of this vast empire are in works of greek philosophers and historians and since 
many of the original persian documents are lost not to mention being subject to varying scholarly views on their origin 
and possible motivations behind them it is difficult to create a definitive and completely objective list nonetheless it 
is clear that cyrus the great cyrus ii of persia and darius the great darius i of persia were critical in the expansion 
of the empire cyrus the great is often believed to be the son of cambyses i grandson of cyrus i the father of cambyses 
ii and a relative of darius the great through a shared ancestor teispes cyrus the great is also believed to have been a 
family member possibly grandson of the median king astyages through his mother mandana of media a minority of scholars 
argue that perhaps achaemenes was a retrograde creation of darius the great in order to reconcile his connection with 
cyrus the great after gaining power ancient greek writers provide some legendary information about achaemenes by calling 
his tribe the pasargadae and stating that he was raised by an eagle plato when writing about the persians identified 
achaemenes with perses ancestor of the persians in greek mythology according to plato achaemenes was the same person as 
perses a son of the ethiopian queen andromeda and the greek hero perseus and a grandson of zeus later writers believed 
that achaemenes and perses were different people and that perses was an ancestor of the king this account further 
confirms that achaemenes could well have been a significant anshan leader and an ancestor of cyrus the great regardless 
both cyrus the great and darius the great were related prominent kings of persia under whose rule the empire expanded to 
include much of the ancient world formation and expansion the empire took its unified form with a central administration 
around pasargadae erected by cyrus the great the empire ended up conquering and enlarging the median empire to include 
in addition egypt and asia minor during the reigns of darius i and his son xerxes i it engaged in military conflict with 
some of the major citystates of ancient greece and although it came close to defeating the greek army this war 
ultimately led to the empires overthrow in bce cambyses i the elder was succeeded as the king of ann by his son cyrus ii 
the great who also succeeded the stillliving arsames as the king of persia thus reuniting the two realms cyrus is 
considered to be the first true king of the persian empire as his predecessors were subservient to the medes cyrus the 
great conquered media lydia and babylon cyrus was politically shrewd modeling himself as the savior of conquered nations 
often allowing displaced people to return and giving his subjects freedom to practice local customs to reinforce this 
image he instituted policies of religious freedom and restored temples and other infrastructure in the newly acquired 
cities most notably the jewish inhabitants of babylon as recorded in the cyrus cylinder and the tanakh as a result of 
his tolerant policies he came to be known by those of the jewish faith as the anointed of the lord his immediate 
successors were less successful cyrus son cambyses ii conquered egypt in bce but died in july bce during a revolt led by 
a sacerdotal clan that had lost its power following cyrus conquest of media the cause of his death remains uncertain 
although it may have been the result of an accident according to herodotus cambyses ii had originally ventured into 
egypt to take revenge for the pharaoh amasiss trickery when he sent a fake egyptian bride whose family amasis had 
murdered instead of his own daughter to wed cambyses ii additionally negative reports of mistreatment caused by amasis 
given by phanes of halicarnassus a wise counsellor serving amasis further enforced cambysess resolve to venture into 
egypt amasis died before cambyses ii could face him but his successor psamtik iii was defeated by cambyses ii in the 
battle of pelusium while cambyses ii was in egypt the zoroastrian priests whom herodotus called magi usurped the throne 
for one of their own gaumata who then pretended to be cambyses iis younger brother bardiya greek smerdis or 
tanaoxarestanyoxarkes who had been assassinated some three years earlier owing to the strict rule of cambyses ii 
especially his stance on taxation and his long absence in egypt the whole people perses medes and all the other nations 
acknowledged the usurper especially as he granted a remission of taxes for three years herodotus iii cambyses ii himself 
would not be able to quell the imposters as he died on the way back from egypt the claim that gaumata had impersonated 
bardiya smerdis is derived from darius the great and the records at the behistun inscription historians are divided over 
the possibility that the story of the impostor was invented by darius as justification for his coup darius made a 
similar claim when he later captured babylon announcing that the babylonian king was not in fact nebuchadnezzar iii but 
an impostor named nidintubel according to the behistun inscription gaumata ruled for seven months before being 
overthrown in bce by darius the great darius i old persian dryavu who holds firm the good also known as darayarahush or 
darius the great the magi though persecuted continued to exist and a year following the death of the first pseudosmerdis 
gaumata saw a second pseudosmerdis named vahyazdta attempt a coup the coup though initially successful failed herodotus 
writes that the native leadership debated the best form of government for the empire it was agreed that an oligarchy 
would divide them against one another and democracy would bring about mob rule resulting in a charismatic leader 
resuming the monarchy therefore they decided a new monarch was in order particularly since they were in a position to 
choose him darius i was chosen monarch from among the leaders he was cousin to cambyses ii and bardiya smerdis claiming 
ariaramnes as his ancestor the achaemenids thereafter consolidated areas firmly under their control it was cyrus the 
great and darius the great who by sound and farsighted administrative planning brilliant military maneuvering and a 
humanistic world view established the greatness of the achaemenids and in less than thirty years raised them from an 
obscure tribe to a world power it was during the reign of darius the great darius i that persepolis was built bc and 
which would serve as capital for several generations of achaemenid kings ecbatana hagmatna city of gatherings modern 
hamadan in media was greatly expanded during this period and served as the summer capital darius the great darius i 
eventually attacked the greek mainland which had supported rebellious greek colonies under his aegis but as a result of 
his defeat at the battle of marathon he was forced to pull the limits of his empire back to asia minor some scholars 
argue that in the context of history of the near and middle east in the first millennium alexander can be considered as 
the last of the achaemenids this is partly because alexander maintained more or less the same political structure and 
borders as the previous achaemenid kings by the th century bc the kings of persia were either ruling over or had 
subordinated territories encompassing not just all of the persian plateau and all of the territories formerly held by 
the assyrian empire mesopotamia the levant cyprus and egypt but beyond this all of anatolia and the armenian plateau as 
well as much of the southern caucasus macedonia and parts of greece and thrace to the north and west parts of central 
asia as far as the aral sea the oxus and jaxartes to the north and northeast the hindu kush and the western indus basin 
corresponding to modern afghanistan and pakistan to the east parts of northern arabia to the south and parts of northern 
libya to the southwest grecopersian wars the ionian revolt in bce and associated revolts in aeolis doris cyprus and 
caria were military rebellions by several regions of asia minor against persian rule lasting from to bce at the heart of 
the rebellion was the dissatisfaction of the greek cities of asia minor with the tyrants appointed by persia to rule 
them along with the individual actions of two milesian tyrants histiaeus and aristagoras in bce the then tyrant of 
miletus aristagoras launched a joint expedition with the persian satrap artaphernes to conquer naxos in an attempt to 
bolster his position in miletus both financially and in terms of prestige the mission was a debacle and sensing his 
imminent removal as tyrant aristagoras chose to incite the whole of ionia into rebellion against the persian king darius 
the great the persians continued to reduce the cities along the west coast that still held out against them before 
finally imposing a peace settlement in bce on ionia that was generally considered to be both just and fair the ionian 
revolt constituted the first major conflict between greece and the achaemenid empire and as such represents the first 
phase of the grecopersian wars asia minor had been brought back into the persian fold but darius had vowed to punish 
athens and eretria for their support of the revolt moreover seeing that the political situation in greece posed a 
continued threat to the stability of his empire he decided to embark on the conquest of all of greece however the 
persian forces were defeated at the battle of marathon and darius would die before having the chance to launch an 
invasion of greece xerxes i bce old persian xayra hero among kings son of darius i vowed to complete the job he 
organized a massive invasion aiming to conquer greece his army entered greece from the north meeting little or no 
resistance through macedonia and thessaly but was delayed by a small greek force for three days at thermopylae a 
simultaneous naval battle at artemisium was tactically indecisive as large storms destroyed ships from both sides the 
battle was stopped prematurely when the greeks received news of the defeat at thermopylae and retreated the battle was a 
strategic victory for the persians giving them uncontested control of artemisium and the aegean sea following his 
victory at the battle of thermopylae xerxes sacked the evacuated city of athens and prepared to meet the greeks at the 
strategic isthmus of corinth and the saronic gulf in bc the greeks won a decisive victory over the persian fleet at the 
battle of salamis and forced xerxes to retire to sardis the land army which he left in greece under mardonius retook 
athens but was eventually destroyed in bce at the battle of plataea the final defeat of the persians at mycale 
encouraged the greek cities of asia to revolt and marked the end of persian expansion into europe the cultural phase 
xerxes i was followed by artaxerxes i bce who moved the capital from persepolis to babylon it was during this reign that 
elamite ceased to be the language of government and aramaic gained in importance it was probably during this reign that 
the solar calendar was introduced as the national calendar under artaxerxes i zoroastrianism became the de facto 
religion of state and for this artaxerxes i is today also known as the constantine of that faith artaxerxes i died in 
susa and his body was brought to persepolis for interment in the tomb of his forebearers artaxerxes i was immediately 
succeeded by his eldest son xerxes ii who was however assassinated by one of his halfbrothers a few weeks later darius 
ii rallied support for himself and marched eastwards executing the assassin and was crowned in his stead from darius ii 
bce at the insistence of the able tissaphernes gave support first to athens then to sparta but in bce darius son cyrus 
the younger was appointed to replace tissaphernes and aid was given entirely to sparta which finally defeated athens in 
bce in the same year darius fell ill and died in babylon at his deathbed his babylonian wife parysatis pleaded with 
darius to have her second eldest son cyrus the younger crowned but darius refused darius was then succeeded by his 
eldest son artaxerxes ii memnon plutarch relates probably on the authority of ctesias that the displaced tissaphernes 
came to the new king on his coronation day to warn him that his younger brother cyrus the younger was preparing to 
assassinate him during the ceremony artaxerxes had cyrus arrested and would have had him executed if their mother 
parysatis had not intervened cyrus was then sent back as satrap of lydia where he prepared an armed rebellion cyrus and 
artaxerxes met in the battle of cunaxa in bc where cyrus was killed artaxerxes ii bce was the longest reigning of the 
achaemenid kings and it was during this year period of relative peace and stability that many of the monuments of the 
era were constructed artaxerxes moved the capital back to persepolis which he greatly extended also the summer capital 
at ecbatana was lavishly extended with gilded columns and roof tiles of silver and copper polybius october the 
extraordinary innovation of the zoroastrian shrine cults can also be dated to his reign and it was probably during this 
period that zoroastrianism was disseminated throughout asia minor and the levant from armenia the construction of 
temples though serving a religious purpose was however not a purely selfless act as they also served as an important 
source of income from the babylonian kings the achaemenids had taken over the concept of a mandatory temple tax a 
onetenth tithe which all inhabitants paid to the temple nearest to their land or other source of income dandamaev 
lukonin a share of this income called the quppu a arri kings chestan ingenious institution originally introduced by 
naboniduswas then turned over to the ruler in retrospect artaxerxes is generally regarded as an amiable man who lacked 
the moral fibre to be a really successful ruler however six centuries later ardeshir i founder of the second persian 
empire would consider himself artaxerxes successor a grand testimony to the importance of artaxerxes to the persian 
psyche fall of the empire according to plutarch artaxerxes successor artaxerxes iii bce came to the throne by bloody 
means ensuring his place upon the throne by the assassination of eight of his halfbrothers in bce artaxerxes iii 
defeated nectanebo ii driving him from egypt and made egypt once again a persian satrapy in bce artaxerxes iii died 
under unclear circumstances natural causes according to cuneiform sources but diodorus a greek historian reports that 
artaxerxes was murdered by bagoas his minister while philip of macedon united the greek states by force and began to 
plan an invasion into the empire artaxerxes iii was succeeded by artaxerxes iv arses who before he could act was also 
poisoned by bagoas bagoas is further said to have killed not only all arses children but many of the other princes of 
the land bagoas then placed darius iii bce a nephew of artaxerxes iv on the throne darius iii previously satrap of 
armenia personally forced bagoas to swallow poison in bce when darius was just succeeding in subduing egypt again 
alexander and his battlehardened troops invaded asia minor at two different times the achaemenids ruled egypt although 
the egyptians twice regained temporary independence from persia after the practice of manetho egyptian historians refer 
to the periods in egypt when the achaemenid dynasty ruled as the twentyseventh dynasty of egypt bc until the death of 
darius ii and the thirtyfirst dynasty of egypt bce which began after nectanebo ii was defeated by the persian king 
artaxerxes iii alexander the great alexander iii of macedon defeated the persian armies at granicus bce followed by 
issus bce and lastly at gaugamela bce afterwards he marched on susa and persepolis which surrendered in early bce from 
persepolis alexander headed north to pasargadae where he visited the tomb of cyrus the burial of the man whom he had 
heard of from cyropedia in the ensuing chaos created by alexanders invasion of persia cyruss tomb was broken into and 
most of its luxuries were looted when alexander reached the tomb he was horrified by the manner in which it had been 
treated and questioned the magi putting them on trial by some accounts alexanders decision to put the magi on trial was 
more an attempt to undermine their influence and display his own power than a show of concern for cyruss tomb regardless 
alexander the great ordered aristobulus to improve the tombs condition and restore its interior showing respect for 
cyrus from there he headed to ecbatana where darius iii had sought refuge darius iii was taken prisoner by bessus his 
bactrian satrap and kinsman as alexander approached bessus had his men murder darius iii and then declared himself 
darius successor as artaxerxes v before retreating into central asia leaving darius body in the road to delay alexander 
who brought it to persepolis for an honorable funeral bessus would then create a coalition of his forces in order to 
create an army to defend against alexander before bessus could fully unite with his confederates at the eastern part of 
the empire alexander fearing the danger of bessus gaining control found him put him on trial in a persian court under 
his control and ordered his execution in a cruel and barbarous manner having conquered the persian empire alexander was 
unable to offer a stable alternative when he died his empire was divided among his generals the diadochi and succeeded 
by a number of smaller states the largest of which was the seleucid empire ruled by the generals of alexander and their 
descendants they in turn would be succeeded by the parthian empire part of the cause of the empires decline had been the 
heavy tax burden put upon the state which eventually led to economic decline an estimate of the tribute imposed on the 
subject nations was up to us m per year this does not include the material goods and supplies that were supplied as 
taxes after the high overhead of government the military the bureaucracy whatever the satraps could safely dip into the 
coffers for themselves this money went into the royal treasury at persepolis alexander iii found some talents besides 
the additional treasure the macedonians were carrying that already had been seized in damascus by parmenio this amounted 
to us b on top of this darius iii had taken talents with him on his flight to the north alexander put this static hoard 
back into the economy and upon his death some talents had been spent on the building of cities dockyards temples and the 
payment of the troops besides the ordinary government expenses additionally one of the satraps harpalus had made off to 
greece with some talents which athens used to rebuild its economy after seizing it during the struggles with the 
corinthian league due to the flood of money from alexanders hoard entering greece however a disruption in the economy 
occurred in agriculture banking rents the great increase in mercenary soldiers that cash allowed the wealthy and an 
increase in piracy another factor contributing to the decline of the empire after xerxes was its failure to ever mold 
the many subject nations into a whole the creation of a national identity was never attempted this lack of cohesion 
eventually affected the efficiency of the military descendants in later iranian dynasties istakhr one of the vassal 
kingdoms of the parthian empire would be overthrown by papak a priest of the temple there papaks son ardair i who named 
himself in remembrance of artaxerxes ii would revolt against the parthians eventually defeating them and establishing 
the sassanid empire or as it is known the second persian empire both the later dynasties of the parthians and sasanians 
would on occasion claim achaemenid descent recently there has been some corroboration for the parthian claim to 
achaemenid ancestry via the possibility of an inherited disease neurofibromatosis demonstrated by the physical 
descriptions of rulers and from evidence of familial disease on ancient coinage government cyrus the great founded the 
empire as a multistate empire governed by four capital states pasargadae babylon susa and ekbatana the achaemenids 
allowed a certain amount of regional autonomy in the form of the satrapy system a satrapy was an administrative unit 
usually organized on a geographical basis a satrap governor was the vassal king who administered the region a general 
supervised military recruitment and ensured order and a state secretary kept the official records the general and the 
state secretary reported directly to the satrap as well as the central government at differing times there were between 
and satrapies cyrus the great created an organized army including the immortals unit consisting of highly trained 
soldiers cyrus also formed an innovative postal system throughout the empire based on several relay stations called 
chapar khaneh darius the great reinforced the empire and expanded persepolis as a ceremonial capital he revolutionized 
the economy by placing it on a silver and gold coinage and introducing a regulated and sustainable tax system that was 
precisely tailored to each satrapy based on their supposed productivity and their economic potential for instance 
babylon was assessed for the highest amount and for a startling mixture of commodities silver talents four months supply 
of food for the army india was clearly already fabled for its gold the province consisting of the sindh and western 
punjab regions of ancient northwestern india traded gold dust equal in value to the very large amount of silver talents 
for various commodities egypt was known for the wealth of its crops it was to be the granary of the persian empire as 
later of romes and was required to provide measures of grain in addition to talents of silver this was exclusively a tax 
levied on subject peoples other accomplishments of darius reign included codification of the data a universal legal 
system and construction of a new capital at persepolis under the achaemenids the trade was extensive and there was an 
efficient infrastructure that facilitated the exchange of commodities in the far reaches of the empire tariffs on trade 
were one of the empires main sources of revenue along with agriculture and tribute the satrapies were linked by a 
kilometer highway the most impressive stretch being the royal road from susa to sardis built by command of darius i the 
relays of mounted couriers could reach the remotest of areas in fifteen days despite the relative local independence 
afforded by the satrapy system royal inspectors the eyes and ears of the king toured the empire and reported on local 
conditions the practice of slavery in achaemenid persia was generally banned although there is evidence that conquered 
andor rebellious armies were sold into captivity zoroastrianism the de facto religion of the empire explicitly forbids 
slavery and the kings of achaemenid persia especially the founder cyrus the great followed this ban to varying degrees 
as evidenced by the freeing of the jews at babylon and the construction of persepolis by paid workers the vexilloid of 
the achaemenid empire was a gold falcon on a field of crimson military despite its humble origins in persis the empire 
reached an enormous size under the leadership of cyrus the great cyrus created a multistate empire where he allowed 
regional rulers called the satrap to rule as his proxy over a certain designated area of his empire called the satrapy 
the basic rule of governance was based upon loyalty and obedience of each satrapy to the central power or the king and 
compliance with tax laws due to the ethnocultural diversity of the subject nations under the rule of persia its enormous 
geographic size and the constant struggle for power by regional competitors the creation of a professional army was 
necessary for both maintenance of the peace and also to enforce the authority of the king in cases of rebellion and 
foreign threat cyrus managed to create a strong land army using it to advance in his campaigns in babylonia lydia and 
asia minor which after his death was used by his son cambyses ii in egypt against psamtik iii cyrus would die battling a 
local iranian insurgency in the empire before he could have a chance to develop a naval force that task however would 
fall to darius the great who would officially give persians their own royal navy to allow them to engage their enemies 
on multiple seas of this vast empire from the black sea and the aegean sea to the persian gulf ionian sea and the 
mediterranean sea navy since its foundation by cyrus the persian empire had been primarily a land empire with a strong 
army but void of any actual naval forces by the th century bc this was to change as the empire came across greek and 
egyptian forces each with their own maritime traditions and capabilities darius the great darius i is to be credited as 
the first achaemenid king to invest in a persian fleet even by then no true imperial navy had existed either in greece 
or egypt persia would become the first empire under darius to inaugurate and deploy the first regular imperial navy 
despite this achievement the personnel for the imperial navy would not come from iran but were often phoenicians mostly 
from sidon egyptians cypriots and greeks chosen by darius the great to operate the empires combat vessels at first the 
ships were built in sidon by the phoenicians the first achaemenid ships measured about meters in length and meters in 
width able to transport up to persian troops at any one trip despite origin of the technique of the arsenal and ship 
construction in sidon soon other states of the empire were constructing their own ships each incorporating slight local 
preferences the ships eventually found their way to the persian gulf persian naval forces laid the foundation for a 
strong persian maritime presence in the persian gulf that existed until the arrival of the british east india company 
and the royal navy in the midth century ad persians were not only stationed on islands of the persian gulf but also had 
ships often of to capacity patrolling the empires various rivers including the shattalarab tigris and nile in the west 
as well as the indus the achaemenid high naval command had established major naval bases located along the shattalarab 
bahrain oman and yemen the persian fleet would soon not only be used for peacekeeping purposes along the shatt alarab 
but would also open the door to trade with india via the persian gulf dariuss navy was in many ways a world power at the 
time but it would be artaxerxes ii who in the summer of bc would build a formidable navy as part of a rearmament which 
would lead to his decisive victory at knidos in bc reestablishing achaemenid power in ionia artaxerxes ii would also 
utilize his massive navy to later on quell a rebellion in egypt the construction material of choice was wood but some 
armored achaemenid ships had metallic blades on the front often meant to slice enemy ships using the ships momentum 
naval ships were also equipped with hooks on the side to grab enemy ships or to negotiate their position the ships were 
propelled by sails or manpower the ships the persians created were unique as far as maritime engagement the ships were 
equipped with two mangonels that would launch projectiles such as stones or flammable substances xenophon describes his 
eyewitness account of a massive military bridge created by joining persian ships across the tigris river the persians 
utilized each boats buoyancy in order to support a connected bridge above which supply could be transferred herodotus 
also gives many accounts of persians utilizing ships to build bridges darius the great in an attempt to subdue the 
scythian horsemen north of the black sea crossed over at the bosphorus using an enormous bridge made by connecting 
achaemenid boats then marched up to the danube crossing it by means of a second boat bridge the bridge over the 
bosphorus essentially connected the nearest tip of asia to europe encompasing at least some meters of open water if not 
more herodotus describes the spectacle and calls it the bridge of darius strait called bosphorus across which the bridge 
of darius had been thrown is hundred and twenty furlongs in length reaching from the euxine to the propontis the 
propontis is five hundred furlongs across and fourteen hundred long its waters flow into the hellespont the length of 
which is four hundred furlongs years later a similar boat bridge would be constructed by xerxes the great xerxes i in 
his invasion of greece although the persians failed to capture the greek city states completely the tradition of 
maritime involvement was carried down by the persian kings most notably artaxerxes ii years later when alexander invaded 
persia and during his advancement into india he took a page from the persian art of war by having hephaestion and 
perdiccas construct a similar boatbridge at the indus river in india in spring of bc culture herodotus in his midth 
century bce account of persian residents of the pontus reports that persian youths from their fifth year to their 
twentieth year were instructed in three things to ride a horse to draw a bow and to speak the truth he further notes 
that the most disgraceful thing in the world the persians think is to tell a lie the next worst to owe a debt because 
among other reasons the debtor is obliged to tell lies in achaemenid persia the lie druj is considered to be a cardinal 
sin and it was punishable by death in some extreme cases tablets discovered by archaeologists in the s at the site of 
persepolis give us adequate evidence about the love and veneration for the culture of truth during the achaemenian 
period these tablets contain the names of ordinary persians mainly traders and warehousekeepers according to professor 
stanley insler of yale university as many as names of officials and petty clerks found on these tablets contain the word 
truth thus says insler we have artapana protector of truth artakama lover of truth artamanah truthminded artafarnah 
possessing splendour of truth artazusta delighting in truth artastuna pillar of truth artafrida prospering the truth and 
artahunara having nobility of truth it was darius the great who laid down the ordinance of good regulations during his 
reign king darius testimony about his constant battle against the lie is found in cuneiform inscriptions carved high up 
in the behistun mountain on the road to kermanshah darius the great darius i testifies i was not a liefollower i was not 
a doer of wrong according to righteousness i conducted myself neither to the weak or to the powerful did i do wrong the 
man who cooperated with my house him i rewarded well who so did injury him i punished well darius had his hands full 
dealing with largescale rebellion which broke out throughout the empire after fighting successfully with nine traitors 
in a year darius records his battles against them for posterity and tells us how it was the lie that made them rebel 
against the empire at behistun darius says i smote them and took prisoner nine kings one was gaumata by name a magian he 
lied thus he said i am smerdis the son of cyrus one acina by name an elamite he lied thus he said i am king in elam one 
nidintubel by name a babylonian he lied thus he said i am nebuchadnezzar the son of nabonidus king darius then tells us 
the lie made them rebellious so that these men deceived the people then advice to his son xerxes who is to succeed him 
as the great king thou who shalt be king hereafter protect yourself vigorously from the lie the man who shall be a 
liefollower him do thou punish well if thus thou shall think may my country be secure languages during the reign of 
cyrus and darius and as long as the seat of government was still at susa in elam the language of the chancellory was 
elamite this is primarily attested in the persepolis fortification and treasury tablets that reveal details of the 
daytoday functioning of the empire in the grand rockface inscriptions of the kings the elamite texts are always 
accompanied by akkadian and old persian inscriptions and it appears that in these cases the elamite texts are 
translations of the old persian ones it is then likely that although elamite was used by the capital government in susa 
it was not a standardized language of government everywhere in the empire the use of elamite is not attested after bc 
following the conquest of mesopotamia the aramaic language as used in that territory was adopted as a vehicle for 
written communication between the different regions of the vast empire with its different peoples and languages the use 
of a single official language which modern scholarship has dubbed official aramaic or imperial aramaic can be assumed to 
have greatly contributed to the astonishing success of the achaemenids in holding their farflung empire together for as 
long as they did in richard frye questioned the classification of imperial aramaic as an official language noting that 
no surviving edict expressly and unambiguously accorded that status to any particular language frye reclassifies 
imperial aramaic as the lingua franca of the achaemenid territories suggesting then that the achaemenidera use of 
aramaic was more pervasive than generally thought many centuries after the fall of the empire aramaic script and as 
ideograms aramaic vocabulary would survive as the essential characteristics of the pahlavi writing system although old 
persian also appears on some seals and art objects that language is attested primarily in the achaemenid inscriptions of 
western iran suggesting then that old persian was the common language of that region however by the reign of artaxerxes 
ii the grammar and orthography of the inscriptions was so far from perfect that it has been suggested that the scribes 
who composed those texts had already largely forgotten the language and had to rely on older inscriptions which they to 
a great extent reproduced verbatim customs herodotus mentions that the persians were invited to great birthday feasts 
herodotus histories which would be followed by many desserts a treat which they reproached the greeks for omitting from 
their meals he also observed that the persians drank wine in large quantities and used it even for counsel deliberating 
on important affairs when drunk and deciding the next day when sober whether to act on the decision or set it aside 
religion it was during the achaemenid period that zoroastrianism reached southwestern iran where it came to be accepted 
by the rulers and through them became a defining element of persian culture the religion was not only accompanied by a 
formalization of the concepts and divinities of the traditional iranian pantheon but also introduced several novel ideas 
including that of free will under the patronage of the achaemenid kings and by the th century bce as the de facto 
religion of the state zoroastrianism reached all corners of the empire the bible claims that cyrus the great allowed the 
jews to return to their homeland after decades of captivity by the assyrian and babylonian empires during the reign of 
artaxerxes i and darius ii herodotus wrote the perses have no images of the gods no temples nor altars and consider the 
use of them a sign of folly this comes i think from their not believing the gods to have the same nature with men as the 
greeks imagine he claims the persians offer sacrifice to the sun and moon to the earth to fire to water and to the winds 
these are the only gods whose worship has come down to them from ancient times at a later period they began the worship 
of urania which they borrowed from the arabians and assyrians mylitta is the name by which the assyrians know this 
goddess to whom the persians referred as anahita the original name here is mithra which has since been explained to be a 
confusion of anahita with mithra understandable since they were commonly worshipped together in one temple from the 
babylonian scholarpriest berosus whoalthough writing over seventy years after the reign of artaxerxes ii mnemonrecords 
that the emperor had been the first to make cult statues of divinities and have them placed in temples in many of the 
major cities of the empire berosus iii berosus also substantiates herodotus when he says the persians knew of no images 
of gods until artaxerxes ii erected those images on the means of sacrifice herodotus adds they raise no altar light no 
fire pour no libations this sentence has been interpreted to identify a critical but later accretion to zoroastrianism 
an altar with a woodburning fire and the yasna service at which libations are poured are all clearly identifiable with 
modern zoroastrianism but apparently were practices that had not yet developed in the midth century boyce also assigns 
that development to the reign of artaxerxes ii th century bc as an orthodox response to the innovation of the shrine 
cults herodotus also observed that no prayer or offering can be made without a magus present but this should not be 
confused with what is today understood by the term magus that is a magupat modern persian mobed a zoroastrian priest nor 
does herodotus description of the term as one of the tribes or castes of the medes necessarily imply that these magi 
were medians they simply were a hereditary priesthood to be found all over western iran and although originally not 
associated with any one specific religion they were traditionally responsible for all ritual and religious services 
although the unequivocal identification of the magus with zoroastrianism came later sassanid era rdth century ad it is 
from herodotus magus of the midth century that zoroastrianism was subject to doctrinal modifications that are today 
considered to be revocations of the original teachings of the prophet also many of the ritual practices described in the 
avestas vendidad such as exposure of the dead were already practiced by the magu of herodotus time art and architecture 
achaemenid architecture refers to the architectural achievements of the achaemenid persians manifesting in construction 
of spectacular cities utilized for governance and habitation temples made for worship and social gatherings such as 
zoroastrian temples and mausoleums erected in honor of fallen kings such as the burial tomb of cyrus the great the 
quintessential feature of persian architecture was its eclectic nature with elements of median assyrian and asiatic 
greek all incorporated yet maintaining a unique persian identity seen in the finished products achaemenid art refers to 
the artistic achievements of the achaemenid persians manifesting in construction of complicated frieze reliefs crafting 
of precious metals such as the oxus treasure decoration of palaces glazed brick masonry fine craftsmanship masonry 
carpentry etc and gardening and outdoor decoration it is critical to understand that although persians borrowed 
techniques from all corners of their empire it was not simply a combination of styles but a synthesis of a new unique 
persian style cyrus the great in fact had an extensive ancient iranian heritage behind him the rich achaemenid gold work 
which inscriptions suggest may have been a specialty of the medes was for instance in the tradition of the delicate 
metalwork found in iron age ii times at hasanlu and still earlier at marlik one of the most amazing examples of both 
achaemenid architecture and art is the grand palace of persepolis and its detailed workmanship coupled with its grand 
scale in describing the construction of his palace at susa darius the great records that yaka timber was brought from 
gandara and from carmania the gold was brought from sardis and from bactria the precious stone lapislazuli and carnelian 
was brought from sogdiana the turquoise from chorasmia the silver and ebony from egypt the ornamentation from ionia the 
ivory from ethiopia and from sindh and from arachosia the stonecutters who wrought the stone those were ionians and 
sardians the goldsmiths were medes and egyptians the men who wrought the wood those were sardians and egyptians the men 
who wrought the baked brick those were babylonians the men who adorned the wall those were medes and egyptians this was 
imperial art on a scale the world had not seen before materials and artists were drawn from all corners of the empire 
and thus tastes styles and motifs became mixed together in an eclectic art and architecture that in itself mirrored the 
persian empire legacy the achaemenid empire left a lasting impression on the heritage and the cultural identity of asia 
and the middle east as well as influencing the development and structure of future empires in fact the greeks and later 
on the romans copied the best features of the persian method of governing the empire and vicariously adopted them georg 
w f hegel in his work the philosophy of history introduces the persian empire as the first empire that passed away and 
its people as the first historical people in history according to his account the persian empire is an empire in the 
modern sense like that which existed in germany and the great imperial realm under the sway of napoleon for we find it 
consisting of a number of states which are indeed dependant but which have retained their own individuality their 
manners and laws the general enactments binding upon all did not infringe upon their political and social idiosyncrasies 
but even protected and maintained them so that each of the nations that constitute the whole had its own form of 
constitution as light illuminates everything imparting to each object a peculiar vitality so the persian empire extends 
over a multitude of nations and leaves to each one its particular character some have even kings of their own each one 
its distinct language arms way of life and customs all this diversity coexists harmoniously under the impartial dominion 
of light a combination of peoples leaving each of them free thereby a stop is put to that barbarism and ferocity with 
which the nations had been wont to carry on their destructive feuds the famous american orientalist professor arthur 
upham pope said the western world has a vast unpaid debt to the persian civilization will durant the american historian 
and philosopher during one his speeches persia in the history of civilization as an address before the iranamerica 
society in tehran on april stated for thousands of years persians have been creating beauty sixteen centuries before 
christ there went from these regions or near it you have been here a kind of watershed of civilization pouring your 
blood and thought and art and religion eastward and westward into the world i need not rehearse for you again the 
achievements of your achaemenid period then for the first time in known history an empire almost as extensive as the 
united states received an orderly government a competence of administration a web of swift communications a security of 
movement by men and goods on majestic roads equaled before our time only by the zenith of imperial rome achaemenid kings 
and rulers unattested achaemenes of persia the epigraphic evidence for these rulers cannot be confirmed and are often 
considered to have been invented by darius i ariaramnes of persia son of teispes and coruler with cyrus i arsames of 
persia son of ariaramnes and coruler with cambyses i attested early in the reign of artaxerxes ii in bce the persians 
lose control over egypt they regained control years later in bce when artaxerxes iii conquered egypt gallery see also 
list of kings of persia achaemenid family tree notes references briant pierre alexander encyclopaedia iranica vol 
routledge kegan paul a sh shahbazi ariaramneia vol encyclopaedia iranica routledge kegan paul schmitt rdiger achaemenid 
dynasty encyclopaedia iranica vol routledge kegan paul schlerath bernfried die indogermanen inst f vergl sprachwiss isbn 
tavernier jan iranica in the achaemenid period ca bc linguistic study of old iranian proper names and loanwords attested 
in noniranian texts peeters publishers isbn stronach david darius at pasargadae a neglected source for the history of 
early persia topoi stronach david anshan and parsa early achaemenid history art and architecture on the iranian plateau 
in john curtis ed mesopotamia and iran in the persian period conquest and imperialism london british museum press 
wiesehfer josef history in preislamic period encyclopaedia iranica further reading wiesehfer josef azizeh azodi 
translator ancient persia london new york ib tauris isbn there have been a number of editions since curtis john e nigel 
tallis editors forgotten empire the world of ancient persia berkeley and los angeles university of california press isbn 
a collection of articles by different authors pierre briant january from cyrus to alexander a history of the persian 
empire isbn the grecopersian wars peter green philip souza the greek and persian wars bc osprey publishing isbn the 
heritage of persia richard n frye history of the persian empire at olmstead the persian empire lindsay allen the persian 
empire jm cook persian fire the first world empire and the battle for the west tom holland pictorial history of iran 
ancient persia before islam bc ad amini sam timelife persians masters of the empire lost civilizations m a dandamaev a 
political history of the achaemenid empire brill academic pub isbn hallock r persepolis fortification tablets chopra rm 
an article on a brief review of preislamic splendour of iran indoiranica vol sideris a achaemenid toreutics in the greek 
periphery in darabandi s m r and a zournantzi eds ancient greece and ancient iran crosscultural encounters athens pp 
external links 