
acinonyx kurteni commonly known as the lynxia cheetah is a discredited fossil specimen of an extinct cheetah discovered 
in china the scientific name was assigned for the skull that was originally described to be that of an extinct species 
of cheetah endemic to asia during the late pliocene subepoch it was estimated to have lived around to ma bp existing for 
approximately million years the fossil discovery was reported in and was claimed to be the most primitive acinonyx 
lineage so far discovered further the study concluded that the cheetahs originated in the old world not the new world as 
previously believed it was thought to share some features with the modern cheetah acinonyx jubatus such as in having 
enlarged sinuses for air intake during sprinting while its teeth show primitive features after a long suspicion of the 
authenticity of the fossil is was finally accepted as a forgery in discovery and description the fossil skull was 
discovered in and described in by per christiansen from the zoological museum in copenhagen and ji h mazk of the 
shanghai science and technology museum in the journal proceedings of the national academy of sciences usa it was 
reported as being discovered from the late pliocene fossiliferousrich hezheng locality in linxia basin hence the popular 
name linxia cheetah in the southeastern part of gansu province china the species name was given in honour of bjrn kurtn 
the late professor of paleontology at the university of helsinki the skull was almost complete except for the occipital 
condyles basioccipital region and upper canines it resembles the true cheetahs in having a tall skull with a domed 
structure a very wide braincase relative to skull length enlarged frontal sinuses a large nasal aperture and a 
welldeveloped occipital crest but the upper premolars are very primitive like those of some extinct felines it is older 
than earlier described species such as the european acinonyx pardinensis dated to about ma old and the north african 
acinonyx aicha about ma old thus it apparently disproved the prevailing notion that cheetahs originated in the new world 
discrediting even at the time of prepublication of the research paper in there were already strong doubts about the 
veracity of the fossil tao deng professor of paleontology at the institute for vertebrate paleontology and 
paleoanthropology in china upon proofreading the manuscript noted the possible forgery of the fossil and immediately 
reported this to pnas just from the published pictures deng said that he could see that parts of the skull had been 
concocted from plaster the technical give away was that the parietal area appeared glued together from disparate bone 
pieces to imitate the skull of a modern cheetah he noted that parts of the skull were created from plaster and are 
missing part of the parietal crests however his objection to publication was denied in an editorial letter on february 
on the grounds that deng had not personally examined the fossil qiu zhanxiang a global expert in mammalian craniums also 
supported the claim that the skull was forged since then it has been criticised publicly by a number of paleontologists 
in china however mazk denied anyone else access to the fossil and upon inquiry the senior author christiansen had never 
seen the original specimen by there was increasing suspicion in the scientific community that the fossil was fake 
including a number of others from china the two discoverers responded with a published defense of their fossil in deng 
was finally allowed access to the original fossil upon invoking the pnas data access policy and on examination his 
primary observations were proven correct he concluded that the fossil has been collected from the late miocene several 
million years older than estimated in the original publication red clay in guanghe county and not from the reported 
region in dongxiang county in addition the zygomatic arches of the skull were made from ribs the incisors were actually 
premolars from other carnivores and the posterior part of the skull was simply a crude plaster deng asked mazk to 
retract the paper mazk finally conceded by stating on august in pnas that after further examination it was determined 
that the fossil used in the study was a composite specimen from the late miocene laterite and not from the early 
pleistocene loess the article is hereby retracted references 