
acipenseriformes spnsrfrmiz are an order of basal rayfinned fishes that includes the sturgeons and paddlefishes as well 
as some extinct families notable characteristics of acipenseriformes include cartilaginous endoskeleton lack of 
vertebral centrum spiral valve intestine conus arteriosus species acipenseriformes order acipenseriformes berg family 
acipenseridae bonaparte subfamily acipenserinae genus acipenser linnaeus acipenser baerii j f brandt acipenser baerii 
baerii j f brandt siberian sturgeon acipenser baerii baicalensis nikolskii baikal sturgeon acipenser brevirostrum 
lesueur shortnose sturgeon acipenser dabryanus a h a dumril yangtze sturgeon acipenser fulvescens rafinesque lake 
sturgeon acipenser gueldenstaedtii j f brandt ratzeburg russian sturgeon acipenser medirostris ayres green sturgeon 
acipenser mikadoi hilgendorf sakhalin sturgeon acipenser naccarii bonaparte adriatic sturgeon acipenser nudiventris 
lovetsky fringebarbel sturgeon acipenser oxyrinchus mitchill acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi vladykov gulf sturgeon 
acipenser oxyrinchus oxyrinchus mitchill atlantic sturgeon acipenser persicus borodin persian sturgeon acipenser 
ruthenus linnaeus sterlet acipenser schrenckii j f brandt amur sturgeon acipenser sinensis j e gray chinese sturgeon 
acipenser stellatus pallas starry sturgeon acipenser sturio linnaeus european sturgeon acipenser transmontanus j 
richardson white sturgeon genus huso j f brandt ratzeburg huso dauricus georgi kaluga sturgeon huso huso linnaeus beluga 
sturgeon subfamily scaphirhynchinae genus scaphirhynchus heckel scaphirhynchus albus forbes r e richardson pallid 
sturgeon scaphirhynchus platorynchus rafinesque shovelnose sturgeon scaphirhynchus suttkusi j d williams clemmer alabama 
sturgeon genus pseudoscaphirhynchus nikolskii pseudoscaphirhynchus fedtschenkoi kessler syr darya sturgeon 
pseudoscaphirhynchus hermanni kessler dwarf sturgeon pseudoscaphirhynchus kaufmanni kessler amu darya sturgeon family 
polyodontidae bonaparte paddlefish genus polyodon lacpde polyodon spathula walbaum american paddlefish genus psephurus 
gnther psephurus gladius e von martens chinese paddlefish timeline of genera external links photos and illustrations of 
acipenseriformes cites finalizes caviar export quotas references martin hochleithner and joern gessner the sturgeons and 
paddlefishes of the world biology and aquaculture martin hochleithner joern gessner and sergej podushka the bibliography 
of acipenseriformes sepkoski jack a compendium of fossil marine animal genera bulletins of american paleontology p 
retrieved 