
for the gp series racing team see addax team the addax addax nasomaculatus also known as the white antelope and the 
screwhorn antelope is an antelope of the genus addax that lives in the sahara desert it was first described by henri de 
blainville in as suggested by its alternative name this pale antelope has long twisted horns typically to cm to in in 
females and to cm to in in males males stand from to cm to in at the shoulder with females at to cm to in they are 
sexually dimorphic as the females are smaller than males the colour of the coat depends on the season in the winter it 
is greyishbrown with white hindquarters and legs and long brown hair on the head neck and shoulders in the summer the 
coat turns almost completely white or sandy blonde the addax mainly eats grasses and leaves of any available shrubs 
leguminous herbs and bushes these animals are welladapted to exist in their desert habitat as they can live without 
water for long periods of time addax form herds of five to members consisting of both males and females they are led by 
the oldest female due to its slow movements the antelope is an easy target for its predators lions humans african 
hunting dogs cheetahs and leopards breeding season is at its peak during winter and early spring the natural habitat of 
the addax are arid regions semideserts and sandy and stony deserts the addax is a critically endangered species of 
antelope as classified by the iucn although extremely rare in its native habitat due to unregulated hunting it is quite 
common in captivity the addax was once abundant in north africa native to chad mauritania and niger it is extinct in 
algeria egypt libya sudan and western sahara it has been reintroduced in morocco and tunisia taxonomy and naming the 
scientific name of the addax is addax nasomaculatus this antelope was first described by french zoologist and anatomist 
henri blainville in it is placed in the monotypic genus addax and family bovidae henri blainville observed syntypes in 
bullocks pantherion and the museum of the royal college of surgeons english naturalist richard lydekker stated their 
type locality to be probably senegambia though he did not have anything to support the claim finally from a discussion 
in it became more probable that british hunters or collectors obtained the addax from the part of sahara in tunisia the 
generic name addax is thought to be obtained from an arabic word meaning a wild animal with crooked horns it is also 
thought to have originated from a latin word the name was first used in the species name nasomaculatus comes from the 
latin words nasus or the prefix naso meaning nose and macula spot or spotted and the suffix atus refers to the spots and 
facial markings of the antelope bedouins use another name for the addax the arabic bakr or bagr al wahsh which literally 
means the cow of the wild the name can be used to refer to other ungulates as well the other common names of addax are 
white antelope and screwhorn antelope genetics the addax has male chromosomes and female chromosomes all chromosomes are 
acrocentric but the first pair of autosomes which is submetacentric the x chromosome is the largest acrocentric and the 
y chromosome a mediumsized one the short and long arms of the pair of submetacentric autosomes correspond respectively 
to the th and first chromosome in a study the banding patterns of chromosomes in addax were found to be much similar to 
those in four other species of the subfamily hippotraginae karyotypes of caprine and bovine species also highly resemble 
the banding patterns in addax history and fossil record in ancient times the addax occurred from northern africa through 
arabia and the levant pictures in a tomb dating back to the bce show at least the partial domestication of the addax by 
the ancient egyptians these pictures show addax and some other antelopes tied with ropes to stakes the number of addax 
captured by a person were considered an indicator of his high social and economic position in the society but today 
excess poaching has resulted in the extinction of this species in egypt since the s addax fossils have been found in 
four sites of egypt bce fossil from great sandsee bce fossil from djara bce fossil from abu ballas stufenmland and bce 
fossil from gilf kebir apart from these fossils have also been excavated from mittleres wadi howar bce fossil and 
pleistocene fossils from grotte neandertaliens jebel irhoud and parc dhydra physical description the addax is a 
spiralhorned antelope male addax stand from to cm to in at the shoulder with females at to cm to in they are sexually 
dimorphic as the females are smaller than males the head and body length in both sexes is to cm to in with a to cm to in 
long tail the weight of males varies from to kg to lb and that of females from to kg to lb the coloring of the addaxs 
coat varies with the season in the winter it is greyishbrown with white hindquarters and legs and long brown hair on the 
head neck and shoulders in the summer the coat turns almost completely white or sandy blonde their head is marked with 
brown or black patches that form an x over their noses they have scraggly beards and prominent red nostrils long black 
hairs stick out between their curved and spiralling horns ending in a short mane on the neck the horns which are found 
on both males and females have two to three twists and are typically to cm to in in females and to cm to in in males 
although the maximum recorded length is cm in the lower and mid portions of the horns are marked with a series of to 
ringshaped ridges the tail is short and slender ending in a puff of black hair the hooves are broad with flat soles and 
strong dewclaws to help them walk on soft sand all four feet possess scent glands the life span of the addax is up to 
years in the wild which can be extended to years under captivity the addax closely resembles the scimitar oryx but can 
be distinguished by its horns and facial markings while the addax is spiralhorned the scimitar oryx has straight cm in 
long horns the addax has a brown hair tuft extending from the base of its horns to between its eyes a white patch 
continuing from the brown hair extends till the middle of the cheek on the other hand the scimitar oryx has a white 
forehead with only a notable brown marking a brown lateral stripe across its eyes it differs from other antelopes by 
having large square teeth like cattle and lacking the typical facial glands parasites the addax are most prone to 
parasites in moist climatic conditions addax have always been infected with nematodes in the trichostrongyloidea and 
strongyloidea families in an exotic ranch in texas an addax was found host to the nematodes haemonchus contortus and 
longistrongylus curvispiculum in its abomasum out of which the former was more dominant behavior and ecology these 
animals are mainly nocturnal particularly in summers in the day they dig into the sand in shady locations and rest in 
these depressions which also protect them from sandstorms addax herds contain both males and females and have from five 
to members they will generally stay in one place and only wander widely in search of food the addax have a strong social 
structure probably based on age and herds are led by the oldest female herds are more likely to be found along the 
northern edge of the tropical rain system during the summer and move north as winter falls they are able to track 
rainfall and will head for these areas where vegetation is more plentiful males are territorial and guard females while 
the females establish their own dominance hierarchies due to its slow movements the addax is an easy target for 
predators such as lions humans african hunting dogs cheetahs and leopards caracals hyenas and servals attack calves the 
addax are normally not aggressive though individuals may charge if they are disturbed adaptations the addax are amply 
suited to live in the deep desert under extreme conditions they can survive without free water almost indefinitely 
because they get moisture from their food and dew that condenses on plants scientists believe the addax has a special 
lining in its stomach that stores water in pouches to use in times of dehydration they also produce highly concentrated 
urine to conserve water pale colour of the coat reflects radiant heat and the length and density of the coat helps in 
thermoregulation in the day the addax huddle together in shaded areas and in cool nights rest in sand hollows these 
practices help in dissipation of body heat and saving water by cooling the body through evaporation in a study eight 
addax antelopes on a diet of grass hay chloris gayana were studied to determine the retention time of food from the 
digestive tract it was found that food retention time was long taken as an adaptation to a diet including a high 
proportion of slow fermenting grasses while the long fluid retention time could be interpreted to be due to watersaving 
mechanisms with low water turnover and a roomy rumen diet the addax live in desert terrain where they eat grasses and 
leaves of what shrubs leguminous herbs and bushes are available their staple foods are the aristida artemisia citrullus 
and acacia grasses perennials which turn green and sprout at the slightest bit of humidity or rain the addax eat only 
certain parts of the plant and tend to crop the aristida grasses neatly to the same height by contrast when feeding on 
panicum grass the drier outer leaves are left alone while they eat the tender inner shoots and seeds these seeds are 
important part of the addax diet being their main source of protein reproduction females are sexually mature at two to 
three years of age and males at about two years breeding occurs throughout the year but it peaks during winter and early 
spring in the northern sahara breeding peaks at the end of winter and beginning of spring in the southern sahara 
breeding peaks from september to october and from january to midapril each estrus bout lasts for one or two days in a 
study the blood serum of female addax was analyzed through immunoassay to know about their luteal phase estrous cycle 
duration was of about days during pregnancy ultrasonography showed the uterine horns as coiled the maximum diameters of 
the ovarian follicle and the corpus luteum were mm in and mm in each female underwent an anovulatory period lasting to 
days during which there was no ovulation anovulation was rare in winter which suggested the effect of seasons on the 
estrous cycle gestation period lasts days about months females may lie or stand during the delivery during which one 
calf is born a postpartum estrus occurs after two or three days the calf weighs kg lb at birth and is weaned at weeks 
old habitat and distribution the addax inhabits arid regions semideserts and sandy and stony deserts they even occur in 
extremely arid areas with less than mm annual rainfall they also inhabit deserts with tussock grasses stipagrostis 
species and succulent thorn scrub cornulaca formerly the addax was widespread in the sahelosaharan region of africa west 
of the nile valley and all countries sharing the sahara desert but today the only known selfsustaining population is 
present in the termit massif reserve niger however there are reports of sightings from the eastern air mountains niger 
and equey chad rare nomads may be seen in north niger southern algeria and libya and the antelope is rumoured to be 
present along the malimauritania border though there are no confirmed sightings the addax was once abundant in north 
africa native to chad mauritania and niger it is extinct in algeria egypt libya sudan and western sahara it has been 
reintroduced in morocco and tunisia threats and conservation decrease in the population of the addax has begun notably 
since the mids more recently addax were found from algeria to sudan but due mainly to overhunting they have become much 
more restricted and rare addax are easy to hunt due to their slow movements roadkill firearms for easy hunting and 
nomadic settlements near waterholes their dryseason feeding places have also decreased numbers moreover their meat and 
leather are highly prized other threats include chronic droughts in the deserts habitat destruction due to more human 
settlements and agriculture less than individuals are thought to exist in the wild today most of the animals being found 
between the termit area of niger the bodl region of western chad and the aoukar in mauritania today there are over addax 
in europe yotvata haibar nature reserve israel sabratha libya giza zoo egypt north america japan and australia under 
captive breeding programmes there are more in private collections and ranches in united states and the middle east addax 
is legally protected in morocco tunisia and algeria hunting of all gazelles is forbidden in libya and egypt although 
enormous reserves such as the hoggar mountains and tasilli in algeria the tnr in niger the ouadi rimouadi achim faunal 
reserve in chad and the newly established wadi howar national park in sudan cover areas where addax previously occurred 
some do not keep addax any more due to less resources the addax has been reintroduced in bou hedma national park tunisia 
and soussmassa national park morocco the first reintroduction in the wild is ongoing in jebil national park tunisia 
grand erg oriental sahara and another is planned in morocco references external links media related to addax at 
wikimedia commons data related to addax nasomaculatus at wikispecies