
the aders duiker cephalophus adersi also known as nunga in swahili kunga marara in kipokomo and harake in giriama is a 
small forestdwelling duiker found only in zanzibar and a small coastal enclave in kenya it is also critically endangered 
it may be a subspecies of the red harveys or peterss duiker or a hybrid of a combination of these it has a population of 
fewer than characteristics the aders duiker stands at around cm in tall at the shoulder its weight varies greatly 
depending on geographical location those in eastern zanzibar weigh kg lb while those in the south weigh only kg lb its 
coat is reddishbrown grayer on the neck and lighter down the backside and underneath a small red crest runs along the 
head it also has small simple horns of to cm to in the muzzle is pointed and the nose has a flat front the ears measure 
cm in long with a marked cowlick or whorl of hair on the nape of the neck distribution and habitat aders duikers live 
primarily in coastal forests and woodlands in africa the species can live in quite dry scrub near the sea or among coral 
outcrops in zanzibar they are restricted to tall thicket forest growing on waterless coral rag in arabuko sokoke kenya 
they are most often trapped within cynometra vegetation especially on red soil c adersi is sympatric with c harveyi on 
the mainland and with c monticola sundevalli on zanzibar although nothing is known regarding their ecological separation 
ecology and behavior the species is very shy alert and sensitive to sound as a result common methods of hunting include 
the bruteforce method of driving the duikers into nets with dogs or silent ambush at feeding sites aders duikers live in 
coastal forests thickets and woodlands where they eat flowers leaves and fruit which has fallen from the forest canopy 
the species appears to be diurnal as it is rarely seen active at night typical feeding patterns are from dawn to late 
morning which is followed by a period of rest and rumination at midafternoon aders duikers generally become active and 
will continue foraging until nightfall they are generally solitary or found in small groups of two or three they often 
pick up scraps dropped by monkeys and birds foraging in the trees c adersi shows a particular dependence on the flowers 
and berries which grow prolifically from trees common to the area such as ebony diospyros consolataei kudu berry cassine 
aethiopica and bush guarri euclea schimperi and bushes such as turkey berry canthium spp and polyspheria in addition to 
these they will eat sprouts buds and other fresh growth found at ground level this duiker species can apparently manage 
without drinking getting most of the hydration they need from their diets these duikers have extremely specific habitat 
requirements being found only in areas of oldgrowth thicket with the highest population densities per kms recorded in 
relatively undisturbed high thicket however kanga did report some aders duikers in secondary thicket in the 
arabukosokoke forest in kenya aders duikers inhabit regions of cyanometra forest not much is known of the aders 
reproductive habits although they may breed all year long conservation an estimated aders duikers are left in the world 
they are threatened by habitat destruction feral dogs and overhunting they are particularly sought by humans due to 
their soft skin and meat the population in zanzibar had declined from in to in and it will probably continue to decrease 
rapidly in kenya the duiker is present at very low densities though the decline is probably not as severe as the other 
population several conservation plans have been made and a captivebreeding program has been proposed external links 
aders duiker at arkive aders duiker at ultimateungulate references 