adolf hitler german adlf htl april april was an austrianborn german politician who was the leader of the nazi party 
german nationalsozialistische deutsche arbeiterpartei nsdap national socialist german workers party he was chancellor of 
germany from to and fhrer leader of nazi germany from to as effective dictator of nazi germany hitler was at the centre 
of world war ii in europe and the holocaust hitler was a decorated veteran of world war i he joined the german workers 
party precursor of the nsdap in and became leader of the nsdap in in he attempted a coup in munich to seize power the
failed coup resulted in hitlers imprisonment during which time he wrote his autobiography and political manifesto mein 
kampf my struggle after his release in hitler gained popular support by attacking the treaty of versailles and promoting 
pangermanism antisemitism and anticommunism with charismatic oratory and nazi propaganda hitler frequently denounced 
international capitalism and communism as being part of a jewish conspiracy hitlers nazi party became the largest 
elected party in the german reichstag leading to his appointment as chancellor in following fresh elections won by his 
coalition the reichstag passed the enabling act which began the process of transforming the weimar republic into the 
third reich a singleparty dictatorship based on the totalitarian and autocratic ideology of national socialism hitler 
aimed to eliminate jews from germany and establish a new order to counter what he saw as the injustice of the postworld 
war i international order dominated by britain and france his first six years in power resulted in rapid economic 
recovery from the great depression the denunciation of restrictions imposed on germany after world war i and the 
annexation of territories that were home to millions of ethnic germans actions which gave him significant popular 
support hitler actively sought lebensraum living space for the german people his aggressive foreign policy is considered 
to be the primary cause of the outbreak of world war ii in europe he directed largescale rearmament and on september 
invaded poland resulting in british and french declarations of war on germany in june hitler ordered an invasion of the 
soviet union by the end of german forces and the european axis powers occupied most of europe and north africa failure 
to defeat the soviets and the entry of the united states into the war forced germany onto the defensive and it suffered 
a series of escalating defeats in the final days of the war during the battle of berlin in hitler married his longtime 
lover eva braun on april less than two days later the two committed suicide to avoid capture by the red army and their 
corpses were burned under hitlers leadership and racially motivated ideology the nazi regime was responsible for the 
genocide of at least million jews and millions of other victims whom he and his followers deemed untermenschen subhumans 
and socially undesirable hitler and the nazi regime were also responsible for the killing of an estimated million 
civilians and prisoners of war in addition million soldiers and civilians died as a result of military action in the 
european theatre of world war ii the number of civilians killed during the second world war was unprecedented in the 
history of warfare early years ancestry hitlers father alois hitler sr was the illegitimate child of maria anna 
schicklgruber because the baptismal register did not show the name of his father alois initially bore his mothers 
surname schicklgruber in johann georg hiedler married aloiss mother maria anna after she died in and johann georg 
hiedler in alois was brought up in the family of hiedlers brother johann nepomuk hiedler in alois was legitimated and 
the baptismal register changed by a priest to register johann georg hiedler as aloiss father recorded as georg hitler 
alois then assumed the surname hitler also spelled as hiedler httler or huettler the hitler surname is probably based on 
one who lives in a hut standard german htte for hut or on shepherd standard german hten for to guard alternatively it 
might be derived from the slavic words hidlar or hidlarcek small cottager or small holder nazi official hans frank 
suggested that aloiss mother had been employed as a housekeeper for a jewish family in graz and that the familys yearold 
son leopold frankenberger had fathered alois because no frankenberger was registered in graz during that period and no 
record of leopold frankenbergers existence has been produced historians dismiss the claim that aloiss father was jewish 
childhood and education adolf hitler was born on april in braunau am inn a town in austriahungary in present day austria 
close to the border with the german empire he was the fourth of six children to alois hitler and klara plzl hitlers 
older siblingsgustav ida and ottodied in infancy when hitler was three the family moved to passau germany there he 
acquired the distinctive lower bavarian dialect rather than austrian german which marked his speech throughout his life 
in the family relocated to leonding near linz and in june alois retired to a small landholding at hafeld near lambach 
where he farmed and kept bees hitler attended volksschule a stateowned school in nearby fischlham the move to hafeld 
coincided with the onset of intense fatherson conflicts caused by hitlers refusal to conform to the strict discipline of 
his school alois hitlers farming efforts at hafeld ended in failure and in the family moved to lambach the eightyearold 
hitler took singing lessons sang in the church choir and even considered becoming a priest in the family returned 
permanently to leonding the death of his younger brother edmund who died from measles in deeply affected hitler he 
changed from a confident outgoing conscientious student to a morose detached sullen boy who constantly fought with his 
father and teachers alois had made a successful career in the customs bureau and wanted his son to follow in his 
footsteps hitler later dramatised an episode from this period when his father took him to visit a customs office 
depicting it as an event that gave rise to an unforgiving antagonism between father and son who were both strongwilled 
ignoring his sons desire to attend a classical high school and become an artist alois sent hitler to the realschule in 
linz in september hitler rebelled against this decision and in mein kampf revealed that he intentionally did poorly in 
school hoping that once his father saw what little progress i was making at the technical school he would let me devote 
myself to my dream like many austrian germans hitler began to develop german nationalist ideas from a young age he 
expressed loyalty only to germany despising the declining habsburg monarchy and its rule over an ethnically variegated 
empire hitler and his friends used the greeting heil and sang the deutschlandlied instead of the austrian imperial 
anthem after aloiss sudden death on january hitlers performance at school deteriorated and his mother allowed him to 
leave he enrolled at the realschule in steyr in september where his behaviour and performance showed some improvement in 
after passing a repeat of the final exam hitler left the school without any ambitions for further education or clear 
plans for a career early adulthood in vienna and munich from hitler lived a bohemian life in vienna financed by orphans 
benefits and support from his mother he worked as a casual labourer and eventually as a painter selling watercolours of 
viennas sights viennas academy of fine arts rejected him in and again in citing unfitness for painting the director 
recommended that hitler study architecture which was also an interest but he lacked academic credentials as he had not 
finished secondary school on december his mother died of breast cancer at the age of after the academys second rejection 
hitler ran out of money and was forced to live in homeless shelters and mens hostels at the time hitler lived there 
vienna was a hotbed of religious prejudice and racism fears of being overrun by immigrants from the east were widespread 
and the populist mayor karl lueger exploited the rhetoric of virulent antisemitism for political effect german 
nationalism had a widespread following in the mariahilf district where hitler lived german nationalist georg ritter von 
schnerer who advocated pangermanism antisemitism antislavism and anticatholicism was one influence on hitler hitler read 
local newspapers such as the deutsches volksblatt that fanned prejudice and played on christian fears of being swamped 
by an influx of eastern jews hostile to what he saw as catholic germanophobia he developed an admiration for martin 
luther the origin and first expression of hitlers antisemitism have been difficult to locate hitler states in mein kampf 
that he first became an antisemite in vienna his close friend august kubizek claimed that hitler was a confirmed 
antisemite before he left linz several sources provide strong evidence that hitler had jewish friends in his hostel and 
in other places in vienna historian richard j evans states that historians now generally agree that his notorious 
murderous antisemitism emerged well after germanys defeat in world war i as a product of the paranoid stabintheback 
explanation for the catastrophe hitler received the final part of his fathers estate in may and moved to munich 
historians believe he left vienna to evade conscription into the austrian army hitler later claimed that he did not wish 
to serve the austrohungarian empire because of the mixture of races in its army after he was deemed unfit for servicehe 
failed his physical exam in salzburg on february he returned to munich world war i at the outbreak of world war i hitler 
was living in munich and volunteered to serve in the bavarian army as an austrian citizen posted to the bavarian reserve 
infantry regiment st company of the list regiment he served as a dispatch runner on the western front in france and 
belgium spending nearly half his time well behind the front lines he was present at the first battle of ypres the battle 
of the somme the battle of arras and the battle of passchendaele and was wounded at the somme he was decorated for 
bravery receiving the iron cross second class in on a recommendation by lieutenant hugo gutmann hitlers jewish superior 
he received the iron cross first class on august a decoration rarely awarded to one of hitlers gefreiter rank he 
received the black wound badge on may during his service at headquarters hitler pursued his artwork drawing cartoons and 
instructions for an army newspaper during the battle of the somme in october he was wounded in the left thigh when a 
shell exploded in the dispatch runners dugout hitler spent almost two months in hospital at beelitz returning to his 
regiment on march on october he was temporarily blinded in a mustard gas attack and was hospitalised in pasewalk while 
there hitler learnt of germanys defeat andby his own accounton receiving this news he suffered a second bout of 
blindness hitler described the war as the greatest of all experiences and was praised by his commanding officers for his 
bravery his wartime experience reinforced his german patriotism and he was shocked by germanys capitulation in november 
his bitterness over the collapse of the war effort began to shape his ideology like other german nationalists he 
believed the dolchstolegende stabintheback myth which claimed that the german army undefeated in the field had been 
stabbed in the back on the home front by civilian leaders and marxists later dubbed the november criminals the treaty of 
versailles stipulated that germany must relinquish several of its territories and demilitarise the rhineland the treaty 
imposed economic sanctions and levied heavy reparations on the country many germans perceived the treatyespecially 
article which declared germany responsible for the waras a humiliation the versailles treaty and the economic social and 
political conditions in germany after the war were later exploited by hitler for political gain entry into politics 
after world war i hitler returned to munich with no formal education or career prospects he remained in the army in july 
he was appointed verbindungsmann intelligence agent of an aufklrungskommando reconnaissance commando of the reichswehr 
assigned to influence other soldiers and to infiltrate the german workers party dap while monitoring the activities of 
the dap hitler was attracted to the founder anton drexlers antisemitic nationalist anticapitalist and antimarxist ideas 
drexler favoured a strong active government a nonjewish version of socialism and solidarity among all members of society 
impressed with hitlers oratorical skills drexler invited him to join the dap hitler accepted on september becoming the 
partys th member at the dap hitler met dietrich eckart one of the partys founders and a member of the occult thule 
society eckart became hitlers mentor exchanging ideas with him and introducing him to a wide range of munich society to 
increase its appeal the dap changed its name to the nationalsozialistische deutsche arbeiterpartei national socialist 
german workers party nsdap hitler designed the partys banner of a swastika in a white circle on a red background hitler 
was discharged from the army on march and began working fulltime for the nsdap the party headquarters was in munich a 
major hotbed of antigovernment german nationalists determined to crush marxism and undermine the weimar republic in 
february already highly effective at speaking to large audienceshe spoke to a crowd of over to publicise the meeting two 
truckloads of party supporters drove around munich waving swastika flags and throwing leaflets hitler soon gained 
notoriety for his rowdy polemic speeches against the treaty of versailles rival politicians and especially against 
marxists and jews in june while hitler and eckart were on a fundraising trip to berlin a mutiny broke out within the 
nsdap in munich members of its executive committee wanted to merge with the rival german socialist party dsp hitler 
returned to munich on july and angrily tendered his resignation the committee members realised that the resignation of 
their leading public figure and speaker would mean the end of the party hitler announced he would rejoin on the 
condition that he would replace drexler as party chairman and that the party headquarters would remain in munich the 
committee agreed and he rejoined the party on july as member even then hitler still faced some opposition within the 
nsdap opponents of hitler in the leadership had hermann esser expelled from the party and printed copies of a pamphlet 
attacking hitler as a traitor to the party in the following days hitler spoke to several packed houses and defended 
himself and esser to thunderous applause his strategy proved successful and at a general membership meeting he was 
granted absolute powers as party chairman with only one vote against hitlers vitriolic beer hall speeches began 
attracting regular audiences he became adept at using populist themes including the use of scapegoats who were blamed 
for his listeners economic hardships psychiatrist carl jung commented in that hitler is the first man to tell every 
german what he has been thinking and feeling all along in his unconscious about german fate especially since the defeat 
in the world war hitler used personal magnetism and an understanding of crowd psychology to advantage while engaged in 
public speaking historians have noted the hypnotic effect of his rhetoric on large audiences and of his eyes in small 
groups the author alfons heck a former member of the hitler youth describes the reaction to a speech by hitler we 
erupted into a frenzy of nationalistic pride that bordered on hysteria for minutes on end we shouted at the top of our 
lungs with tears streaming down our faces sieg heil sieg heil sieg heil from that moment on i belonged to adolf hitler 
body and soul alfons heck although hitlers oratory skills and personal traits were generally received well by large 
crowds and at official events some who met hitler privately noted that his appearance and demeanour failed to make a 
lasting impression early followers included rudolf hess former air force ace hermann gring and army captain ernst rhm 
rhm became head of the nazis paramilitary organisation the sturmabteilung sa stormtroopers which protected meetings and 
attacked political opponents a critical influence on his thinking during this period was the aufbau vereinigung a 
conspiratorial group of white russian exiles and early national socialists the group financed with funds channelled from 
wealthy industrialists introduced hitler to the idea of a jewish conspiracy linking international finance with 
bolshevism beer hall putsch in hitler enlisted the help of world war i general erich ludendorff for an attempted coup 
known as the beer hall putsch the nsdap used italian fascism as a model for their appearance and policies hitler wanted 
to emulate benito mussolinis march on rome by staging his own coup in bavaria to be followed by a challenge to the 
government in berlin hitler and ludendorff sought the support of staatskommissar state commissioner gustav ritter von 
kahr bavarias de facto ruler however kahr along with police chief hans ritter von seisser and reichswehr general otto 
von lossow wanted to install a nationalist dictatorship without hitler on november hitler and the sa stormed a public 
meeting of people organised by kahr in the brgerbrukeller a beer hall in munich interrupting kahrs speech he announced 
that the national revolution had begun and declared the formation of a new government with ludendorff retiring to a back 
room hitler with handgun drawn demanded and got the support of kahr seisser and lossow hitlers forces initially 
succeeded in occupying the local reichswehr and police headquarters but kahr and his cohorts quickly withdrew their 
support neither the army nor the state police joined forces with hitler the next day hitler and his followers marched 
from the beer hall to the bavarian war ministry to overthrow the bavarian government but police dispersed them sixteen 
nsdap members and four police officers were killed in the failed coup hitler fled to the home of ernst hanfstaengl and 
by some accounts contemplated suicide he was depressed but calm when arrested on november for high treason his trial 
before the special peoples court in munich began in february and alfred rosenberg became temporary leader of the nsdap 
on april hitler was sentenced to five years imprisonment at landsberg prison there he received friendly treatment from 
the guards and he was allowed mail from supporters and regular visits by party comrades pardoned by the bavarian supreme 
court he was released from jail on december against the state prosecutors objections including time on remand hitler 
served just over one year in prison while at landsberg hitler dictated most of the first volume of mein kampf my 
struggle originally entitled four and a half years of struggle against lies stupidity and cowardice to his deputy rudolf 
hess the book dedicated to thule society member dietrich eckart was an autobiography and exposition of his ideology the 
book laid out hitlers plans for transforming german society into one based on race some passages implied genocide 
published in two volumes in and it sold copies between and one million copies were sold in hitlers first year in office 
rebuilding the nsdap at the time of hitlers release from prison politics in germany had become less combative and the 
economy had improved limiting hitlers opportunities for political agitation as a result of the failed beer hall putsch 
the nsdap and its affiliated organisations were banned in bavaria in a meeting with prime minister of bavaria heinrich 
held on january hitler agreed to respect the authority of the state and promised that he would seek political power only 
through the democratic process the meeting paved the way for the ban on the nsdap to be lifted on february hitler was 
barred from public speaking by the bavarian authorities a ban that remained in place until to advance his political 
ambitions in spite of the ban hitler appointed gregor strasser otto strasser and joseph goebbels to organise and grow 
the nsdap in northern germany a superb organiser gregor strasser steered a more independent political course emphasising 
the socialist elements of the partys programme the stock market in the united states crashed on october the impact in 
germany was dire millions were thrown out of work and several major banks collapsed hitler and the nsdap prepared to 
take advantage of the emergency to gain support for their party they promised to repudiate the versailles treaty 
strengthen the economy and provide jobs rise to power brning administration the great depression provided a political 
opportunity for hitler germans were ambivalent to the parliamentary republic which faced strong challenges from right 
and leftwing extremists the moderate political parties were increasingly unable to stem the tide of extremism and the 
german referendum of helped to elevate nazi ideology the elections of september resulted in the breakup of a grand 
coalition and its replacement with a minority cabinet its leader chancellor heinrich brning of the centre party governed 
through emergency decrees from president paul von hindenburg governance by decree would become the new norm and paved 
the way for authoritarian forms of government the nsdap rose from obscurity to win per cent of the vote and 
parliamentary seats in the election becoming the secondlargest party in parliament hitler made a prominent appearance at 
the trial of two reichswehr officers lieutenants richard scheringer and hans ludin in late both were charged with 
membership in the nsdap at that time illegal for reichswehr personnel the prosecution argued that the nsdap was an 
extremist party prompting defence lawyer hans frank to call on hitler to testify on september hitler testified that his 
party would pursue political power solely through democratic elections which won him many supporters in the officer 
corps brnings austerity measures brought little economic improvement and were extremely unpopular hitler exploited this 
by targeting his political messages specifically at people who had been affected by the inflation of the s and the 
depression such as farmers war veterans and the middle class hitler had formally renounced his austrian citizenship on 
april but at the time did not acquire german citizenship for almost seven years he was stateless unable to run for 
public office and faced the risk of deportation on february the interior minister of brunswick who was a member of the 
nsdap appointed hitler as administrator for the states delegation to the reichsrat in berlin making hitler a citizen of 
brunswick and thus of germany in hitler ran against hindenburg in the presidential elections the viability of his 
candidacy was underscored by a january speech to the industry club in dsseldorf which won him support from many of 
germanys most powerful industrialists hindenburg had support from various nationalist monarchist catholic and republican 
parties and some social democrats hitler used the campaign slogan hitler ber deutschland hitler over germany a reference 
to his political ambitions and his campaigning by aircraft he was one of the first politicians to use aircraft travel 
for political purposes and utilised it effectively hitler came in second in both rounds of the election garnering more 
than per cent of the vote in the final election although he lost to hindenburg this election established hitler as a 
strong force in german politics appointment as chancellor the absence of an effective government prompted two 
influential politicians franz von papen and alfred hugenberg along with several other industrialists and businessmen to 
write a letter to hindenburg the signers urged hindenburg to appoint hitler as leader of a government independent from 
parliamentary parties which could turn into a movement that would enrapture millions of people hindenburg reluctantly 
agreed to appoint hitler as chancellor after two further parliamentary electionsin july and november had not resulted in 
the formation of a majority government hitler headed a shortlived coalition government formed by the nsdap and 
hugenbergs party the german national peoples party dnvp on january the new cabinet was sworn in during a brief ceremony 
in hindenburgs office the nsdap gained three posts hitler was named chancellor wilhelm frick minister of the interior 
and hermann gring minister of the interior for prussia hitler had insisted on the ministerial positions as a way to gain 
control over the police in much of germany reichstag fire and march elections as chancellor hitler worked against 
attempts by the nsdaps opponents to build a majority government because of the political stalemate he asked hindenburg 
to again dissolve the reichstag and elections were scheduled for early march on february the reichstag building was set 
on fire gring blamed a communist plot because dutch communist marinus van der lubbe was found in incriminating 
circumstances inside the burning building according to the british historian sir ian kershaw the consensus of nearly all 
historians is that van der lubbe actually set the fire others including william l shirer and alan bullock are of the 
opinion that the nsdap itself was responsible at hitlers urging hindenburg responded with the reichstag fire decree of 
february which suspended basic rights and allowed detention without trial the decree was permitted under article of the 
weimar constitution which gave the president the power to take emergency measures to protect public safety and order 
activities of the german communist party were suppressed and some communist party members were arrested in addition to 
political campaigning the nsdap engaged in paramilitary violence and the spread of anticommunist propaganda in the days 
preceding the election on election day march the nsdaps share of the vote increased to per cent and the party acquired 
the largest number of seats in parliament hitlers party failed to secure an absolute majority necessitating another 
coalition with the dnvp day of potsdam and the enabling act on march the new reichstag was constituted with an opening 
ceremony at the garrison church in potsdam this day of potsdam was held to demonstrate unity between the nazi movement 
and the old prussian elite and military hitler appeared in a morning coat and humbly greeted hindenburg to achieve full 
political control despite not having an absolute majority in parliament hitlers government brought the 
ermchtigungsgesetz enabling act to a vote in the newly elected reichstag the act gave hitlers cabinet full legislative 
powers for four years and with certain exceptions allowed deviations from the constitution the bill required a twothirds 
majority to pass leaving nothing to chance the nazis used the provisions of the reichstag fire decree to keep several 
social democratic deputies from attending the communists had already been banned on march the reichstag assembled at the 
kroll opera house under turbulent circumstances ranks of sa men served as guards inside the building while large groups 
outside opposing the proposed legislation shouted slogans and threats towards the arriving members of parliament the 
position of the centre party the third largest party in the reichstag was decisive after hitler verbally promised party 
leader ludwig kaas that hindenburg would retain his power of veto kaas announced the centre party would support the 
enabling act the act passed by a vote of with all parties except the social democrats voting in favour the enabling act 
along with the reichstag fire decree transformed hitlers government into a de facto legal dictatorship removal of 
remaining limits at the risk of appearing to talk nonsense i tell you that the national socialist movement will go on 
for years dont forget how people laughed at me years ago when i declared that one day i would govern germany they laugh 
now just as foolishly when i declare that i shall remain in power adolf hitler to a british correspondent in berlin june 
having achieved full control over the legislative and executive branches of government hitler and his allies began to 
suppress the remaining opposition the social democratic party was banned and its assets seized while many trade union 
delegates were in berlin for may day activities sa stormtroopers demolished union offices around the country on may all 
trade unions were forced to dissolve and their leaders were arrested some were sent to concentration camps the german 
labour front was formed as an umbrella organisation to represent all workers administrators and company owners thus 
reflecting the concept of national socialism in the spirit of hitlers volksgemeinschaft peoples community by the end of 
june the other parties had been intimidated into disbanding this included the nazis nominal coalition partner the dnvp 
with the sas help hitler forced its leader hugenberg to resign on june on july the nsdap was declared the only legal 
political party in germany although the country had effectively been a oneparty state since the passage of the enabling 
act four months earlier the demands of the sa for more political and military power caused anxiety among military 
industrial and political leaders in response hitler purged the entire sa leadership in the night of the long knives 
which took place from june to july hitler targeted ernst rhm and other sa leaders who along with a number of hitlers 
political adversaries such as gregor strasser and former chancellor kurt von schleicher were rounded up arrested and 
shot while the international community and some germans were shocked by the murders many in germany believed hitler was 
restoring order on august hindenburg died the previous day the cabinet had enacted the law concerning the highest state 
office of the reich this law stated that upon hindenburgs death the office of president would be abolished and its 
powers merged with those of the chancellor hitler thus became head of state as well as head of government and was 
formally named as fhrer und reichskanzler leader and chancellor this law violated the enabling act although it allowed 
hitler to deviate from the constitution the act explicitly barred him from passing any law tampering with the presidency 
in the constitution had been amended to make the president of the high court of justice not the chancellor acting 
president pending new elections nonetheless no one objected with this action hitler eliminated the last legal remedy by 
which he could be removed from office as head of state hitler became supreme commander of the armed forces the 
traditional loyalty oath of servicemen was altered to affirm loyalty to hitler personally rather than to the office of 
supreme commander or the state on august the merger of the presidency with the chancellorship was approved by per cent 
of the electorate voting in a plebiscite in early hitler used blackmail to consolidate his hold over the military by 
instigating the blombergfritsch affair hitler forced his war minister field marshal werner von blomberg to resign by 
using a police dossier that showed that blombergs new wife had a record for prostitution army commander colonelgeneral 
werner von fritsch was removed after the schutzstaffel ss produced allegations that he had engaged in a homosexual 
relationship both men had fallen into disfavour because they objected to hitlers demand to make the wehrmacht ready for 
war as early as hitler assumed blombergs title of commanderinchief thus taking personal command of the armed forces he 
replaced the ministry of war with the oberkommando der wehrmacht armed forces high command or okw headed by general 
wilhelm keitel on the same day sixteen generals were stripped of their commands and more were transferred all were 
suspected of not being sufficiently pronazi by early february twelve more generals had been removed hitler took care to 
give his dictatorship the appearance of legality many of his decrees were explicitly based on the reichstag fire decree 
and hence on article of the weimar constitution the reichstag renewed the enabling act twice each time for a fouryear 
period while elections to the reichstag were still held voters were presented with a single list of nazis and pronazi 
guests which carried with well over percent of the vote third reich economy and culture in august hitler appointed 
reichsbank president hjalmar schacht as minister of economics and in the following year as plenipotentiary for war 
economy in charge of preparing the economy for war reconstruction and rearmament were financed through mefo bills 
printing money and seizing the assets of people arrested as enemies of the state including jews unemployment fell from 
six million in to one million in hitler oversaw one of the largest infrastructure improvement campaigns in german 
history leading to the construction of dams autobahns railroads and other civil works wages were slightly lower in the 
mid to late s compared with wages during the weimar republic while the cost of living increased by per cent the average 
working week increased during the shift to a war economy by the average german was working between and hours a week 
hitlers government sponsored architecture on an immense scale albert speer instrumental in implementing hitlers 
classicist reinterpretation of german culture was placed in charge of the proposed architectural renovations of berlin 
in hitler opened the summer olympic games in berlin rearmament and new alliances in a meeting with german military 
leaders on february hitler spoke of conquest for lebensraum in the east and its ruthless germanisation as his ultimate 
foreign policy objectives in march prince bernhard wilhelm von blow secretary at the auswrtiges amt foreign office 
issued a statement of major foreign policy aims anschluss with austria the restoration of germanys national borders of 
rejection of military restrictions under the treaty of versailles the return of the former german colonies in africa and 
a german zone of influence in eastern europe hitler found blows goals to be too modest in speeches during this period he 
stressed the peaceful goals of his policies and a willingness to work within international agreements at the first 
meeting of his cabinet in hitler prioritised military spending over unemployment relief germany withdrew from the league 
of nations and the world disarmament conference in october in january over per cent of the people of the saarland then 
under league of nations administration voted to unite with germany that march hitler announced an expansion of the 
wehrmacht to memberssix times the number permitted by the versailles treatyincluding development of an air force 
luftwaffe and an increase in the size of the navy kriegsmarine britain france italy and the league of nations condemned 
these violations of the treaty but did virtually nothing to stop it the anglogerman naval agreement agna of june allowed 
german tonnage to increase to per cent of that of the british navy hitler called the signing of the agna the happiest 
day of his life believing that the agreement marked the beginning of the anglogerman alliance he had predicted in mein 
kampf france and italy were not consulted before the signing directly undermining the league of nations and setting the 
treaty of versailles on the path towards irrelevance germany reoccupied the demilitarised zone in the rhineland in march 
in violation of the versailles treaty hitler also sent troops to spain to support general franco after receiving an 
appeal for help in july at the same time hitler continued his efforts to create an anglogerman alliance in august in 
response to a growing economic crisis caused by his rearmament efforts hitler ordered gring to implement a four year 
plan to prepare germany for war within the next four years the plan envisaged an allout struggle between judeobolshevism 
and german national socialism which in hitlers view required a committed effort of rearmament regardless of the economic 
costs count galeazzo ciano foreign minister of mussolinis government declared an axis between germany and italy and on 
november germany signed the anticomintern pact with japan britain china italy and poland were also invited to join the 
anticomintern pact but only italy signed in hitler abandoned his plan of an anglogerman alliance blaming inadequate 
british leadership at a meeting in the reich chancellery with his foreign ministers and military chiefs that november 
hitler restated his intention of acquiring lebensraum for the german people he ordered preparations for war in the east 
to begin as early as and no later than in the event of his death the conference minutes recorded as the hossbach 
memorandum were to be regarded as his political testament he felt that a severe decline in living standards in germany 
as a result of the economic crisis could only be stopped by military aggression aimed at seizing austria and 
czechoslovakia hitler urged quick action before britain and france gained a permanent lead in the arms race in early in 
the wake of the blombergfritsch affair hitler asserted control of the militaryforeign policy apparatus dismissing 
neurath as foreign minister and appointing himself oberster befehlshaber der wehrmacht supreme commander of the armed 
forces from early onwards hitler was carrying out a foreign policy ultimately aimed at war world war ii early diplomatic 
successes alliance with japan in february on the advice of his newly appointed foreign minister the strongly projapanese 
joachim von ribbentrop hitler ended the sinogerman alliance with the republic of china to instead enter into an alliance 
with the more modern and powerful japan hitler announced german recognition of manchukuo the japaneseoccupied state in 
manchuria and renounced german claims to their former colonies in the pacific held by japan hitler ordered an end to 
arms shipments to china and recalled all german officers working with the chinese army in retaliation chinese general 
chiang kaishek cancelled all sinogerman economic agreements depriving the germans of many chinese raw materials austria 
and czechoslovakia on march hitler declared unification of austria with nazi germany in the anschluss hitler then turned 
his attention to the ethnic german population of the sudetenland region of czechoslovakia on march hitler held a series 
of secret meetings in berlin with konrad henlein of the sudeten heimfront home front the largest of the ethnic german 
parties of the sudetenland the men agreed that henlein would demand increased autonomy for sudeten germans from the 
czechoslovakian government thus providing a pretext for german military action against czechoslovakia in april henlein 
told the foreign minister of hungary that whatever the czech government might offer he would always raise still higher 
demands he wanted to sabotage an understanding by any means because this was the only method to blow up czechoslovakia 
quickly in private hitler considered the sudeten issue unimportant his real intention was a war of conquest against 
czechoslovakia in april hitler ordered the okw to prepare for fall grn case green the code name for an invasion of 
czechoslovakia as a result of intense french and british diplomatic pressure on september czechoslovakian president 
edvard bene unveiled the fourth plan for constitutional reorganisation of his country which agreed to most of henleins 
demands for sudeten autonomy henleins heimfront responded to bene offer by instigating a series of violent clashes with 
the czechoslovakian police that led to the declaration of martial law in certain sudeten districts germany was dependent 
on imported oil a confrontation with britain over the czechoslovakian dispute could curtail germanys oil supplies this 
forced hitler to call off fall grn originally planned for october on september hitler neville chamberlain douard 
daladier and mussolini attended a oneday conference in munich that led to the munich agreement which handed over the 
sudetenland districts to germany chamberlain was satisfied with the munich conference calling the outcome peace for our 
time while hitler was angered about the missed opportunity for war in he expressed his disappointment in a speech on 
october in saarbrcken in hitlers view the britishbrokered peace although favourable to the ostensible german demands was 
a diplomatic defeat which spurred his intent of limiting british power to pave the way for the eastern expansion of 
germany as a result of the summit hitler was selected time magazines man of the year for in late and early the 
continuing economic crisis caused by rearmament forced hitler to make major defence cuts in his export or die speech of 
january he called for an economic offensive to increase german foreign exchange holdings to pay for raw materials such 
as highgrade iron needed for military weapons on march in violation of the munich accord and possibly as a result of the 
deepening economic crisis requiring additional assets hitler ordered the wehrmacht to invade prague and from prague 
castle he proclaimed bohemia and moravia a german protectorate start of world war ii in private discussions in hitler 
declared britain the main enemy to be defeated and that polands obliteration was a necessary prelude for that goal the 
eastern flank would be secured and land would be added to germanys lebensraum offended by the british guarantee on march 
of polish independence he said i shall brew them a devils drink in a speech in wilhelmshaven for the launch of the 
battleship tirpitz on april he threatened to denounce the anglogerman naval agreement if the british continued to 
guarantee polish independence which he perceived as an encirclement policy poland was to either become a german 
satellite state or be neutralised to secure the reichs eastern flank and to prevent a possible british blockade hitler 
initially favoured the idea of a satellite state but upon its rejection by the polish government he decided to invade 
and made this the main foreign policy goal of on april hitler ordered the military to prepare for fall weiss case white 
the plan for invading poland on august in a reichstag speech on april he renounced both the anglogerman naval agreement 
and the germanpolish nonaggression pact in august hitler told his generals that his original plan for was to establish 
an acceptable relationship with poland in order to fight against the west historians such as william carr gerhard 
weinberg and kershaw have argued that one reason for hitlers rush to war was his fear of an early death hitler was 
concerned that a military attack against poland could result in a premature war with britain hitlers foreign minister 
and former ambassador to london joachim von ribbentrop assured him that neither britain nor france would honour their 
commitments to poland accordingly on august hitler ordered a military mobilisation against poland this plan required 
tacit soviet support and the nonaggression pact the molotovribbentrop pact between germany and the soviet union led by 
joseph stalin included a secret agreement to partition poland between the two countries contrary to ribbentrops 
prediction that britain would sever anglopolish ties britain and poland signed the anglopolish alliance on august this 
along with news from italy that mussolini would not honour the pact of steel prompted hitler to postpone the attack on 
poland from august to september hitler unsuccessfully tried to manoeuvre the british into neutrality by offering them a 
nonaggression guarantee on august he then instructed ribbentrop to present a lastminute peace plan with an impossibly 
short time limit in an effort to blame the imminent war on british and polish inaction despite his concerns over a 
british intervention hitler continued to pursue the planned invasion of poland on september germany invaded western 
poland under the pretext of having been denied claims to the free city of danzig and the right to extraterritorial roads 
across the polish corridor which germany had ceded under the versailles treaty in response britain and france declared 
war on germany on september surprising hitler and prompting him to angrily ask ribbentrop now what france and britain 
did not act on their declarations immediately and on september soviet forces invaded eastern poland the fall of poland 
was followed by what contemporary journalists dubbed the phoney war or sitzkrieg sitting war hitler instructed the two 
newly appointed gauleiters of northwestern poland albert forster of reichsgau danzigwest prussia and arthur greiser of 
reichsgau wartheland to germanise their areas with no questions asked about how this was accomplished whereas polish 
citizens in forsters area merely had to sign forms stating that they had german blood greiser carried out a brutal 
ethnic cleansing campaign on the polish population in his purview greiser complained that forster was allowing thousands 
of poles to be accepted as racial germans and thus endangered german racial purity hitler refrained from getting 
involved this inaction has been advanced as an example of the theory of working towards the fhrer hitler issued vague 
instructions and expected his subordinates to work out policies on their own another dispute pitched one side 
represented by himmler and greiser who championed ethnic cleansing in poland against another represented by gring and 
hans frank governorgeneral of the general government territory of occupied poland who called for turning poland into the 
granary of the reich on february the dispute was initially settled in favour of the gringfrank view which ended the 
economically disruptive mass expulsions on may himmler issued a memo entitled some thoughts on the treatment of alien 
population in the east calling for the expulsion of the entire jewish population of europe into africa and reducing the 
polish population to a leaderless class of labourers hitler called himmlers memo good and correct and ignoring gring and 
frank implemented the himmlergreiser policy in poland hitler began a military buildup on germanys western border and in 
april german forces invaded denmark and norway on april hitler proclaimed the birth of the greater germanic reich his 
vision of a united empire of the germanic nations of europe where the dutch flemish and scandinavians were joined into a 
racially pure polity under german leadership in may germany attacked france and conquered luxembourg the netherlands and 
belgium these victories prompted mussolini to have italy join forces with hitler on june france and germany signed an 
armistice on june kershaw notes that hitlers popularity within germanyand german support for the war reached its peak 
when he returned to berlin on july from his tour of paris following the unexpected swift victory hitler promoted twelve 
generals to the rank of field marshal during the field marshal ceremony britain whose troops were forced to evacuate 
france by sea from dunkirk continued to fight alongside other british dominions in the battle of the atlantic hitler 
made peace overtures to the new british leader winston churchill and upon their rejection he ordered a series of aerial 
attacks on royal air force airbases and radar stations in southeast england the german luftwaffe failed to defeat the 
royal air force in what became known as the battle of britain by the end of october hitler realised that air superiority 
for the invasion of britainin operation sea lioncould not be achieved and he ordered nightly air raids on british cities 
including london plymouth and coventry on september the tripartite pact was signed in berlin by sabur kurusu of imperial 
japan hitler and italian foreign minister ciano and later expanded to include hungary romania and bulgaria thus yielding 
the axis powers hitlers attempt to integrate the soviet union into the antibritish bloc failed after inconclusive talks 
between hitler and molotov in berlin in november and he ordered preparations for a fullscale invasion of the soviet 
union in the spring of german forces were deployed to north africa the balkans and the middle east in february german 
forces arrived in libya to bolster the italian presence in april hitler launched the invasion of yugoslavia quickly 
followed by the invasion of greece in may german forces were sent to support iraqi rebel forces fighting against the 
british and to invade crete path to defeat on june contravening the hitlerstalin nonaggression pact of million axis 
troops attacked the soviet union this largescale offensive codenamed operation barbarossa was intended to destroy the 
soviet union and seize its natural resources for subsequent aggression against the western powers the invasion conquered 
a huge area including the baltic republics belarus and west ukraine after the successful battle of smolensk hitler 
ordered army group centre to halt its advance to moscow and temporarily diverted its panzer groups north and south to 
aid in the encirclement of leningrad and kiev his generals disagreed with this change of targets and his decision caused 
a major crisis among the military leadership the pause provided the red army with an opportunity to mobilise fresh 
reserves historian russel stolfi considers it to be one of the major factors that caused the failure of the moscow 
offensive which was resumed only in october and ended disastrously in december on december japan attacked the american 
fleet based at pearl harbor hawaii four days later hitler formally declared war against the united states on december 
himmler asked hitler what to do with the jews of russia to which hitler replied als partisanen auszurotten exterminate 
them as partisans israeli historian yehuda bauer has commented that the remark is probably as close as historians will 
ever get to a definitive order from hitler for the genocide carried out during the holocaust in late german forces were 
defeated in the second battle of el alamein thwarting hitlers plans to seize the suez canal and the middle east 
overconfident in his own military expertise following the earlier victories in hitler became distrustful of his army 
high command and began to interfere in military and tactical planning with damaging consequences in december and january 
hitlers repeated refusal to allow their withdrawal at the battle of stalingrad led to the almost total destruction of 
the th army over axis soldiers were killed and were taken prisoner of the estimated german soldiers captured in the city 
itself only around survived captivity and returned to germany after the war thereafter came a decisive strategic defeat 
at the battle of kursk hitlers military judgement became increasingly erratic and germanys military and economic 
position deteriorated along with hitlers health following the allied invasion of sicily in mussolini was removed from 
power by victor emmanuel iii after a vote of no confidence of the grand council marshal pietro badoglio placed in charge 
of the government soon surrendered to the allies throughout and the soviet union steadily forced hitlers armies into 
retreat along the eastern front on june the western allied armies landed in northern france in what was one of the 
largest amphibious operations in history operation overlord as a result of these significant setbacks for the german 
army many of its officers concluded that defeat was inevitable and that hitlers misjudgement or denial would drag out 
the war and result in the complete destruction of the country between and there were many plans to assassinate hitler 
some of which proceeded to significant degrees the most well known came from within germany and was at least partly 
driven by the increasing prospect of a german defeat in the war in july in the july plot part of operation valkyrie 
claus von stauffenberg planted a bomb in one of hitlers headquarters the wolfs lair at rastenburg hitler narrowly 
survived because staff officer heinz brandt moved the briefcase containing the bomb behind a leg of the heavy conference 
table when the bomb exploded the table deflected much of the blast away it was also lessened by the open windows later 
hitler ordered savage reprisals resulting in the execution of more than people defeat and death by late both the red 
army and the western allies were advancing into germany recognising the strength and determination of the red army 
hitler decided to use his remaining mobile reserves against the american and british troops which he perceived as far 
weaker on december he launched an offensive in the ardennes to incite disunity among the western allies and perhaps 
convince them to join his fight against the soviets the offensive failed hitlers hope to negotiate peace with the united 
states and britain was buoyed by the death of franklin d roosevelt on april but contrary to his expectations this caused 
no rift among the allies acting on his view that germanys military failures had forfeited its right to survive as a 
nation hitler ordered the destruction of all german industrial infrastructure before it could fall into allied hands 
arms minister albert speer was entrusted with executing this scorched earth plan but he secretly disobeyed the order on 
april his th birthday hitler made his last trip from the fhrerbunker fhrers shelter to the surface in the ruined garden 
of the reich chancellery he awarded iron crosses to boy soldiers of the hitler youth who were now fighting the red army 
at the front near berlin by april georgy zhukovs st belorussian front had broken through the defences of general 
gotthard heinricis army group vistula during the battle of the seelow heights and advanced into the outskirts of berlin 
in denial about the dire situation hitler placed his hopes on the undermanned and underequipped armeeabteilung steiner 
army detachment steiner commanded by waffen ss general felix steiner hitler ordered steiner to attack the northern flank 
of the salient and the german ninth army was ordered to attack northward in a pincer attack during a military conference 
on april hitler asked about steiners offensive he was told that the attack had not been launched and that the soviets 
had entered berlin this prompted hitler to ask everyone except wilhelm keitel alfred jodl hans krebs and wilhelm 
burgdorf to leave the room hitler then launched a tirade against the treachery and incompetence of his commanders 
culminating in his declarationfor the first timethat everything was lost hitler then announced that he would stay in 
berlin until the end and then shoot himself by april the red army had completely surrounded berlin and goebbels made a 
proclamation urging its citizens to defend the city that same day gring sent a telegram from berchtesgaden arguing that 
since hitler was isolated in berlin he gring should assume leadership of germany gring set a deadline after which he 
would consider hitler incapacitated hitler responded by having gring arrested and in his last will and testament written 
on april he removed gring from all government positions on april hitler discovered that himmler who had left berlin on 
april was trying to discuss surrender terms with the western allies he ordered himmlers arrest and had hermann fegelein 
himmlers ss representative at hitlers hq in berlin shot after midnight on april hitler married eva braun in a small 
civil ceremony in the fhrerbunker after a modest wedding breakfast with his new wife he then took secretary traudl junge 
to another room and dictated his will the event was witnessed and documents signed by krebs burgdorf goebbels and 
bormann later that afternoon hitler was informed of the execution of mussolini which presumably increased his 
determination to avoid capture on april after intense streettostreet combat when soviet troops were within a block or 
two of the reich chancellery hitler and braun committed suicide braun bit into a cyanide capsule and hitler shot himself 
both their bodies were carried up the stairs and through the bunkers emergency exit to the bombedout garden behind the 
reich chancellery where they were placed in a bomb crater and doused with petrol the corpses were set on fire as the red 
army shelling continued grand admiral karl dnitz and joseph goebbels assumed hitlers roles as head of state and 
chancellor respectively berlin surrendered on may records in the soviet archives obtained after the fall of the soviet 
union state that the remains of hitler braun joseph and magda goebbels the six goebbels children general hans krebs and 
hitlers dogs were repeatedly buried and exhumed on april a soviet kgb team used detailed burial charts to exhume five 
wooden boxes at the smersh facility in magdeburg the remains from the boxes were burned crushed and scattered into the 
biederitz river a tributary of the nearby elbe according to kershaw the corpses of braun and hitler were fully burned 
when the red army found them and only a lower jaw with dental work could be identified as hitlers remains the holocaust 
if the international jewish financiers outside europe should succeed in plunging the nations once more into a world war 
then the result will not be the bolshevisation of the earth and thus the victory of jewry but the annihilation of the 
jewish race in europe adolf hitler addressing the german reichstag january the holocaust and germanys war in the east 
was based on hitlers longstanding view that the jews were the great enemy of the german people and that lebensraum was 
needed for the expansion of germany he focused on eastern europe for this expansion aiming to defeat poland and the 
soviet union and on removing or killing the jews and slavs the generalplan ost general plan east called for deporting 
the population of occupied eastern europe and the soviet union to west siberia for use as slave labour or to be murdered 
the conquered territories were to be colonised by german or germanised settlers the goal was to implement this plan 
after the conquest of the soviet union but when this failed hitler moved the plans forward by january it had been 
decided to kill the jews slavs and other deportees considered undesirable the holocaust also known as the endlsung der 
judenfrage or final solution of the jewish question was ordered by hitler and organised and executed by heinrich himmler 
and reinhard heydrich the records of the wannsee conference held on january and led by heydrich with fifteen senior nazi 
officials participating provide the clearest evidence of systematic planning for the holocaust on february hitler was 
recorded saying we shall regain our health only by eliminating the jews although no direct order from hitler authorising 
the mass killings has surfaced his public speeches orders to his generals and the diaries of nazi officials demonstrate 
that he conceived and authorised the extermination of european jewry he approved the einsatzgruppenkilling squads that 
followed the german army through poland the baltic and the soviet unionand he was well informed about their activities 
by summer auschwitz concentration camp was rapidly expanded to accommodate large numbers of deportees for killing or 
enslavement scores of other concentration camps and satellite camps were set up throughout europe with several camps 
devoted exclusively to extermination between and the schutzstaffel ss assisted by collaborationist governments and 
recruits from occupied countries was responsible for the deaths of at least eleven million people including to million 
jews representing twothirds of the jewish population of europe and between and romani people deaths took place in 
concentration and extermination camps ghettos and through mass executions many victims of the holocaust were gassed to 
death whereas others died of starvation or disease or while working as slave labourers in addition to eliminating jews 
the nazis also planned to reduce the population of the conquered territories by million people through starvation in an 
action called the hunger plan food supplies would be diverted to the german army and german civilians cities would be 
razed and the land allowed to return to forest or resettled by german colonists together the hunger plan and generalplan 
ost would have led to the starvation of million people in the soviet union these partially fulfilled plans resulted in 
the democidal deaths of an estimated million civilians and prisoners of war hitlers policies also resulted in the 
killing of nearly two million poles over three million soviet prisoners of war communists and other political opponents 
homosexuals the physically and mentally disabled jehovahs witnesses adventists and trade unionists hitler did not speak 
publicly about the killings and seems never to have visited the concentration camps the nazis also embraced the concept 
of racial hygiene on september hitler presented two lawsknown as the nuremberg lawsto the reichstag the laws banned 
sexual relations and marriages between aryans and jews and were later extended to include gypsies negroes or their 
bastard offspring the laws also stripped all nonaryans of their german citizenship and forbade the employment of 
nonjewish women under the age of in jewish households hitlers early eugenic policies targeted children with physical and 
developmental disabilities in a programme dubbed action brandt and later authorised a euthanasia programme for adults 
with serious mental and physical disabilities now referred to as action t leadership style hitler ruled the nsdap 
autocratically by asserting the fhrerprinzip leader principle the principle relied on absolute obedience of all 
subordinates to their superiors thus he viewed the government structure as a pyramid with himselfthe infallible leaderat 
the apex rank in the party was not determined by electionspositions were filled through appointment by those of higher 
rank who demanded unquestioning obedience to the will of the leader hitlers leadership style was to give contradictory 
orders to his subordinates and to place them into positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped with 
those of others to have the stronger one do the job in this way hitler fostered distrust competition and infighting 
among his subordinates to consolidate and maximise his own power his cabinet never met after and he discouraged his 
ministers from meeting independently hitler typically did not give written orders instead he communicated them verbally 
or had them conveyed through his close associate martin bormann he entrusted bormann with his paperwork appointments and 
personal finances bormann used his position to control the flow of information and access to hitler hitler dominated his 
countrys war effort during world war ii to a greater extent than any other national leader he assumed the role of 
supreme commander of the armed forces during and subsequently made all major decisions regarding germanys military 
strategy his decision to mount a risky series of offensives against norway france and the low countries in against the 
advice of the military proved successful though the diplomatic and military strategies he employed in attempts to force 
the united kingdom out of the war ended in failure hitler deepened his involvement in the war effort by appointing 
himself commanderinchief of the army in december from this point forward he personally directed the war against the 
soviet union while his military commanders facing the western allies retained a degree of autonomy hitlers leadership 
became increasingly disconnected from reality as the war turned against germany with the militarys defensive strategies 
often hindered by his slow decision making and frequent directives to hold untenable positions nevertheless he continued 
to believe that only his leadership could deliver victory in the final months of the war hitler refused to consider 
peace negotiations regarding the complete destruction of germany as preferable to surrender the military did not 
challenge hitlers dominance of the war effort and senior officers generally supported and enacted his decisions legacy 
hitlers suicide was likened by contemporaries to a spell being broken public support for hitler had collapsed by the 
time of his death and few germans mourned his passing kershaw argues that most civilians and military personnel were too 
busy adjusting to the collapse of the country or fleeing from the fighting to take any interest according to historian 
john toland national socialism burst like a bubble without its leader hitlers actions and nazi ideology are almost 
universally regarded as gravely immoral according to kershaw never in history has such ruinationphysical and moralbeen 
associated with the name of one man hitlers political programme brought about a world war leaving behind a devastated 
and impoverished eastern and central europe germany itself suffered wholesale destruction characterised as zero hour 
hitlers policies inflicted human suffering on an unprecedented scale according to rj rummel the nazi regime was 
responsible for the democidal killing of an estimated million civilians and prisoners of war in addition million 
soldiers and civilians died as a result of military action in the european theatre of world war ii and hitlers role has 
been described as the main author of a war leaving over million dead and millions more grieving their lost ones the 
total number of civilians killed during the second world war was an unprecedented development in the history of warfare 
historians philosophers and politicians often use the word evil to describe the nazi regime many european countries have 
criminalised both the promotion of nazism and holocaust denial historian friedrich meinecke described hitler as one of 
the great examples of the singular and incalculable power of personality in historical life english historian hugh 
trevorroper saw him as among the terrible simplifiers of history the most systematic the most historical the most 
philosophical and yet the coarsest cruelest least magnanimous conqueror the world has ever known for the historian john 
m roberts hitlers defeat marked the end of a phase of european history dominated by germany in its place emerged the 
cold war a global confrontation between the western bloc dominated by the united states and other nato nations and the 
eastern bloc dominated by the soviet union historian sebastian haffner avers that without hitler and the displacement of 
the jews the modern nation state of israel would not exist he contends that without hitler the decolonisation of former 
european spheres of influence would not have occurred as quickly and would have been postponed further haffner claims 
that other than alexander the great hitler had a more significant impact than any other comparable historical figure in 
that he too caused a wide range of worldwide changes in a relatively short time span views on religion hitler was born 
to a practising catholic mother and an anticlerical father but after leaving home hitler never again attended mass or 
received the sacraments speer states that hitler made harsh pronouncements against the church to his political 
associates and though he never officially left it he had no attachment to it he adds that hitler felt that in the 
absence of the church the faithful would turn to mysticism which he considered a step backwards according to speer 
hitler believed that either japanese religious beliefs or islam would have been a more suitable religion for the germans 
than christianity with its meekness and flabbiness historian john s conway states that hitler was fundamentally opposed 
to the christian churches according to bullock hitler did not believe in god was anticlerical and held christian ethics 
in contempt because they contravened his preferred view of survival of the fittest he favoured aspects of protestantism 
that suited his own views and adopted some elements of the catholic churchs hierarchical organisation liturgy and 
phraseology in his politics hitler viewed the church as an important politically conservative influence on society and 
he adopted a strategic relationship with it that suited his immediate political purposes in public hitler often praised 
christian heritage and german christian culture though professing a belief in an aryan jesus one who fought against the 
jews any prochristian public rhetoric was at variance with his personal beliefs which described christianity as 
absurdity and nonsense founded on lies according to a us office of strategic services report the nazi master plan hitler 
planned to destroy the influence of christian churches within the reich his eventual goal was the total elimination of 
christianity this goal informed hitlers movement very early on but he saw it as inexpedient to express this extreme 
position publicly according to bullock hitler wanted to wait until after the war before executing this plan speer wrote 
that hitler had a negative view of himmlers and alfred rosenbergs mystical notions and himmlers attempt to mythologise 
the ss hitler was more pragmatic and his ambitions centred on more practical concerns health researchers have variously 
suggested that hitler suffered from irritable bowel syndrome skin lesions irregular heartbeat coronary sclerosis 
parkinsons disease syphilis and tinnitus in a report prepared for the office of strategic services in walter c langer of 
harvard university described hitler as a neurotic psychopath in his book the psychopathic god adolf hitler historian 
robert g l waite proposes that hitler suffered from borderline personality disorder historians henrik eberle and 
hansjoachim neumann consider that while hitler suffered from a number of illnesses including parkinsons disease he did 
not experience pathological delusions and was always fully aware of and responsible for the decisions he was making 
theories about hitlers medical condition are difficult to prove and placing too much weight on them may have the effect 
of attributing many of the events and consequences of the third reich to the possibly impaired physical health of one 
individual kershaw feels that it is better to take a broader view of german history by examining what social forces led 
to the third reich and its policies rather than to pursue narrow explanations for the holocaust and world war ii based 
on only one person hitler followed a vegetarian diet at social events he sometimes gave graphic accounts of the 
slaughter of animals in an effort to make his dinner guests shun meat bormann had a greenhouse constructed near the 
berghof near berchtesgaden to ensure a steady supply of fresh fruit and vegetables for hitler throughout the war hitler 
publicly avoided alcohol he occasionally drank beer and wine in private but gave up drinking due to weight gain in he 
was a nonsmoker for most of his life but smoked heavily in his youth to cigarettes a day he eventually quit calling the 
habit a waste of money he encouraged his close associates to quit by offering a gold watch to any who were able to break 
the habit hitler began using amphetamine occasionally after and became addicted to it in late speer linked this use of 
amphetamines to hitlers increasingly inflexible decision making for example rarely allowing military retreats prescribed 
medications during the war years hitler took many pills each day for chronic stomach problems and other ailments he 
suffered ruptured eardrums as a result of the july plot bomb blast in and wood splinters had to be removed from his legs 
newsreel footage of hitler shows tremors of his hand and a shuffling walk which began before the war and worsened 
towards the end of his life hitlers personal physician theodor morell treated hitler with a drug that was commonly 
prescribed in for parkinsons disease ernstgnther schenck and several other doctors who met hitler in the last weeks of 
his life also formed a diagnosis of parkinsons disease family hitler created a public image as a celibate man without a 
domestic life dedicated entirely to his political mission and the nation he met his mistress eva braun in and married 
her in april in september his halfniece geli raubal committed suicide with hitlers gun in his munich apartment it was 
rumoured among contemporaries that geli was in a romantic relationship with him and her death was a source of deep 
lasting pain paula hitler the last living member of his immediate family died in in propaganda films hitler exploited 
documentary films and newsreels to inspire a cult of personality he was involved and appeared in a series of propaganda 
films throughout his political careersuch as der sieg des glaubens and triumph des willensmade by leni riefenstahl 
regarded as a pioneer of modern filmmaking list of propaganda and film appearances der sieg des glaubens victory of 
faith triumph des willens triumph of the will tag der freiheit unsere wehrmacht day of freedom our armed forces olympia 
see also fhrermuseum adolf hitlers adjutants hitler and mannerheim recording julius schaub chief aide karl mayr hitlers 
superior in army intelligence karl wilhelm krause personal valet list of books by or about adolf hitler mein kampf 
online versions poison kitchen streets named after adolf hitler notes references citations sources online external links 
works by or about adolf hitler at internet archive adolf hitler at the internet movie database real life footage in 
documentaries adolf hitler character at the internet movie database as portrayed in film and tv adolf hitler the vault 
fbi records hitler and his officers world war ii movies in color wwincolor