
the african civet svt civettictis civetta is the largest representative of the african viverridae it is the sole member 
of its genus african civets can be found from coast to coast across subsaharan africa they are primarily nocturnal and 
spend the day sleeping in dense vegetation during the night when they are the most active they can be found in a wide 
variety of habitat consisting of thick forest to open country the african civet is a solitary mammal that is easily 
recognizable by its unique coloration the black and white stripes and blotches covering the coarse pelage of the animal 
are extremely variable and allow it to be cryptic the black bands surrounding the african civets eyes closely resemble 
those of the raccoon other distinguishing features of the african civet are its disproportionately large hindquarters 
and its erectile dorsal crest the african civet is an omnivorous generalist taking small vertebrates invertebrates eggs 
carrion and vegetable matter it is capable of taking on poisonous invertebrates such as the millipedes most other 
species avoid and snakes prey is primarily detected by smell and sound rather than by sight like all civets it has 
perineal glands that produce a fluid known as civet which it spreads on markers in its territory to claim its range it 
is used in the perfume industry some civets such as the african civet and the congo water civet are semiaquatic although 
most civets live on the ground palm civets are found in trees and eat fruit anatomy among the extant viverrid family 
only the binturong matches or exceeds the african civet in size while females are sometimes credited as slightly larger 
there are no great discernible differences in measurements between sexes weight can range from to kg to lb with an 
average mass of about kg lb headandbody length is to cm to in while the tail is to cm to in and shoulder height averages 
cm in civettictis civetta is a stocky animal with a long body and appears shortlegged for its size although its hind 
limbs are noticeably larger and more powerful it has a short broad neck a pointed muzzle small rounded ears small eyes 
and a long bushy tail the african civet has five digits per manus in which the first toe is slightly set back from the 
others the african civet has long curved semiretractile claws its feet are compact and unsuitable for digging or 
climbing and the soles of the feet are hairless african civets have a modified synapsid skull which is heavybuilt and is 
the longest of any viverrid the zygomatic arch is robust and provides a large area for attachment of the masseter muscle 
the skull also has a welldeveloped sagittal crest which provides a large area for attachment of the temporalis muscle 
this musculature and the african civets strong mandible give it a powerful bite oriented to its omnivorous diet african 
civets have a total of forty teeth and a dental formula of like many mammals the african civet has two types of fur 
under fur and guard hairs the pelage of the african civet is coarse and wiry the coat is unique to each individual just 
like a human fingerprint the dorsal base color of the fur varies from white to creamy yellow to reddish the stripes 
spots and blotches which cover the animal are deep brown to black in coloration horizontal lines are prominent on the 
hind limbs spots are normally present on the midsection of the animal and fade anteriorly into vertical stripes above 
the forelimbs the tail of the african civet is black with a few white bands and the paws are completely black the head 
neck and ears are clearly marked a black band stretches across its eyes like that of a raccoon and the coloration of its 
neck is referred to as a double collar because of the two black neck bands following the spine of the animal extending 
from the neck to the base of the tail is the erectile dorsal crest the hairs of the erectile crest are longer than those 
of the rest of the pelage if an african civet feels threatened it raises its dorsal crest to make itself look larger and 
thus more formidable and dangerous to attack this behavior is a predatory defense the perineal gland is what this 
species of civet is well known for and civettictis civetta has historically been the species most often harvested for it 
this gland secretes a white or yellow waxy substance called civet which is used by civets for marking territory and by 
humans as a perfume base perineal and anal glands are found in both male and female african civets however the glands 
are bigger in males which can produce a stronger secretion the perineal glands are located between the scrotum and the 
prepuce in males and between the anus and the vulva in females name civettictis is derived from the french civette and 
the greek ictis meaning weasel civette came from the arabic zabd or sinnawr alzabd civet cat the civet has been a valued 
domestic animal in africa since ancient times cultural use the perineal gland secretion civet has been the basic 
ingredient for many perfumes for hundreds of years and is still being used today although on the decline since the 
creation of synthetic musk african civets have been kept in captivity and milked for their civet which is diluted into 
perfumes they can secrete three to four grams of civet per week and it can be sold for just under five hundred dollars 
per kilogram the wspa says that chanel cartier and lancme have all admitted to using civet in their products and that 
laboratory tests detected the ingredient in chanel no ecology reproduction the average lifespan of an african civet is 
fifteen to twenty years mating occurs in the warm and wet summer months from august to january this time is favored 
because of the large populations of insects females create a nest which is normally in dense vegetation and commonly in 
a hole dug by another animal females are polyestrous and can have up to three litters per year female african civets 
normally give birth to one to four young the young are born in advanced stages compared to most carnivores they are 
covered in a dark short fur and can crawl at birth the young leave the nest after eighteen days but are still dependent 
on the mother for milk and protection for another two months see also list of solitary animals references 
