
the african golden cat profelis aurata is a mediumsized wild cat distributed over the rainforests of west and central 
africa it is about cm in long and has a tail of about cm in in length it is a close relative of both the caracal and the 
serval but current classification places it as the only member of the genus profelis description the african golden cat 
has variable fur color typically ranging from cinnamon or reddishbrown to grey although melanistic forms also exist it 
can be either spotted with the spotting ranging from faded tan to heavy black in color or not spotted at all its 
undersides and areas around the eyes cheeks chin and throat are generally lighter in color and may be almost white its 
tail is darker on the top and may be heavily banded lightly banded or plain although it always ends in a black tip those 
cats in the western parts of its range tend to have heavier spotting than those in the eastern areas two color morphs a 
red and a grey phase were once thought to indicate separate species rather than variations of the same species the 
african golden cats is about twice the size of a domestic cat its rounded head is very small in relation to its body 
size it is a heavily built cat with stocky long legs a relatively short tail and large paws body length usually varies 
within the range to cm to in tail length ranges from to cm to in and shoulder height is about to cm to in the cat weighs 
around to kg to lb with males being larger than females overall the african golden cat resembles the caracal but has 
shorter untufted ears a longer tail and a shorter more rounded face they have brown eyes and small rounded ears despite 
the wide variation in coat color pelts of african golden cats can be identified by the presence of a distinctive whorled 
ridge of fur in front of the shoulders where the hairs change direction distribution and habitat the african golden cat 
inhabits tropical forests from sea level to m ft it prefers dense moist forest with heavy undergrowth and is often found 
close to rivers but it may also be found in cloud forest bamboo forests and high moorland habitats the cat is found from 
senegal in the west to kenya in the east and ranges as far north as the central african republic and as far south as 
northern angola behavior and diet due to its extremely reclusive habits little is known about the behavior of african 
golden cats they are solitary animals and are normally crepuscular or nocturnal although they have also been observed 
hunting during the day depending on the availability of local prey the african golden cat is able to climb but hunts 
primarily on the ground it mainly feeds on rodents but also includes birds small monkeys duikers giant forest hog 
piglets and small antelope in its diet these cats have also been known to take domestic poultry and livestock 
reproduction knowledge of the african golden cats reproductive habits is based on captive specimens they breed readily 
in captivity the mother gives birth to one or two kittens after a gestation period of around days the kittens weigh to g 
to oz but grow and develop rapidly in comparison with other small cat species one individual was reported to be scaling 
a cm wall within days of birth reflecting a high degree of physical agility from an early age the kittens eyes open 
within a week of birth and they are weaned at weeks females reach sexual maturity at months of age but the males do not 
do so until months these cats live up to years in captivity but their lifespan in the wild is unknown subspecies the 
subspecies of african golden cat are p a aurata from congo to uganda p a celidogaster throughout western africa each of 
the subspecies has two distinct spotting patterns p a aurata can either have spots just on its lower body or no spots at 
all except a few indistinct spots on the belly p a celidogaster can either be spotted all over or have a few spots on 
the back and neck with a few large spots on the sides of the body some sources list p a cottoni instead of p a 
celidogaster in this arrangement all populations are included in the nominate with the supposed second subspecies 
restricted to the rainforests of easternmost congo and uganda but this is based on a study and lumps allopatric 
populations in the nominate while treating parapatric ones as distinct which is not very reasonable biogeographically 
thus subsequent authors usually considered the supposed p a cottoni a semimelanistic color morph and recognized an 
allopatric division between the subspecies as listed above this confusion is mainly due to the redgrey polymorphism 
mentioned above as well as uncertainties about the type localities in any case individuals resembling p a cottoni have 
been found all over the species range in particularly humid habitats and individuals in captivity have even been 
observed to change coat color between the typical red morph and dusky grey as they shed their fur the african golden cat 
is superficially similar to the asian golden cat however genetic analysis has determined they are not closely related 
its closest relatives are the caracal caracal caracal and serval leptailurus serval while the asian golden cat 
pardofelis temminckii belongs to the genus pardofelis references external links species portrait african golden cat 
iucnssc cat specialist group rare african golden cat sightings elusive golden cat caught on film in uganda black white 
and gabon colour 