
the african clawless otter aonyx capensis also known as the cape clawless otter or groot otter is the secondlargest 
freshwater species of otter african clawless otters are found near permanent bodies of water in savannah and lowland 
forest areas they range through most of subsaharan africa except for the congo river basin and arid areas they are 
characterized by partly webbed and clawless feet from which their name is derived taxonomy aonyx capensis is a member of 
the weasel family mustelidae and of the order carnivora the earliest known species of otter potamotherium valetoni 
occurred in the upper oligocene of europe a capensis first appears in the fossil record during the pleistocene aonyx is 
closely related to the extinct giant sardinian otter megalenhydris subspecies mammal species of the world lists six 
subspecies of aonyx capensis a c capensis schinz a c hindei thomas a c meneleki thomas a c congica lnnberg a c microdon 
pohle a c philippsi hinton however some authorities consider the congocameroon clawless otter to be a separate species a 
congicus under this view only the first three of the above list would be subspecies of a capensis description african 
clawless otters have thick smooth fur with almost silky underbellies chestnut in color they are characterized by white 
facial markings that extend downward towards their throat and chest areas paws are partially webbed with five fingers 
and no opposable thumbs all lack claws except for digits and of the hind feet their large skulls are broad and flat with 
relatively small orbits and short rostra molars are large and flat used for crushing of prey male otters are slightly 
larger than females on average adults are cm in in length including their tails that comprised about a third of their 
length weights can range from kg lbs with most otters averaging between and kg lbs despite being closely related to the 
oriental smallclawed otter the african clawless otter is often twice as massive as that relatively diminutive mustelid 
habitat african clawless otters can be found anywhere from open coastal plains to semiarid regions to densely forested 
areas surviving mostly in southern africa the otters live in areas surrounding permanent bodies of water usually 
surrounded by some form of foliage logs branches and loose foliage greatly appeal to the otter as this provides shelter 
shade and great rolling opportunities slow and rather clumsy on land they build burrows in banks near water allowing for 
easier food access and a quick escape from predators in the false bay area of the cape peninsula they have been observed 
scavenging along beaches and rocks and hunting in shallow surf for mullet they are mainly nocturnal in urban areas and 
lie up during the day in quiet bushy areas reproduction females give birth to litters containing two to five young 
around early spring mating takes place in short periods throughout the rainy season in december afterwards both males 
and females go their separate ways and return to their solitary lives once more young are raised solely by the females 
gestation lasts around two months days weaning takes place between and days with the young reaching full maturity around 
one year of age diet the diet of aonyx capensis primarily includes waterdwelling animals such as crabs fish frogs and 
worms they dive after prey to catch it then swim to shore again where they eat their fore paws come in handy as 
searching devices and are great tools for digging on the muddy bottoms of ponds and rivers picking up rocks and looking 
under logs extremely sensitive whiskers vibrissae are used as sensors in the water to pick up the movements of potential 
prey behavior though mostly solitary animals african clawless otters will live in neighboring territories of family 
groups of up to five individuals each still having its own range within that territory they mostly keep to themselves 
unless seeking a mate territories are marked using a pair of anal glands which secrete a particular scent each otter is 
very territorial over its particular range awkward on land but acrobats in the water these animals spend their days 
swimming and catching food they return to underground burrows holts for safety cooling or a rubdown using grasses and 
leaves mainly aquatic creatures their tails are used for locomotion and propel them through the water they are also used 
for balance when walking or sitting upright predation quick in the water and burrowing on land a capensis does not have 
many predators its greatest threat comes from the python which will often lay in wait near or in the water other 
predators would include the crocodile and fish eagles if threatened a highpitched scream is emitted to warn neighboring 
otters and confuse a predator thermoregulation living in africa environments can become very hot staying cool means 
spending time in the water and using burrows as a way to escape the highest temperatures of the day to stay warm on the 
other hand the otters depend solely on their thick fur guard hairs cover the body acting as insulation since the otter 
lacks an insulating layer of body fat its only means of warmth is provided by its thick coat of fur economic impact the 
biggest threat to african clawless otters comes from humans aonyx specimens will often forage in manmade fisheries and 
may be hunted or become entangled in nets overfishing by humans may reduce the food supply available to otters they are 
sometimes hunted for their thick soft pelts which humans use in forms of clothing in forested areas logging may be a 
major threat since erosion leads to greatly increased turbidity in rivers which can in turn greatly reduce the 
populations of fish on which the otters depend this may well be a far greater threat to otters than hunting the otter 
trail is a hiking trail in south africa named after the african clawless otter which is found in this area otters along 
the trail are protected as it falls within the tsitsikamma national park references further reading somers m j and nel j 
a j habitat selection by the cape clawless otter aonyx capensis in rivers in the western cape province south africa 
african journal of ecology pg somers m j foraging behaviour of cape clawless otters aonyx capensis in a marine habitat 
journal of zoology pg external links animal diversity web americazoo otternet itech african clawless 
otter