
the african fish eagle haliaeetus vocifer or to distinguish it from the true fish eagles ichthyophaga the african sea 
eagle is a large species of eagle that is found throughout subsaharan africa wherever large bodies of open water occur 
that have an abundant food supply it is the national bird of zimbabwe zambia and south sudan as a result of its large 
range it is known in many languages examples of names include visarend in afrikaans aigle pcheur in french hungwe in 
shona and inkwazi in isizulu this species may resemble the bald eagle in appearance though related each species occurs 
on different continents with the bald eagle being resident in north america taxonomy the african fish eagle is a species 
placed in the genus haliaeetus sea eagles the african fish eagles closest relative appears to be the critically 
endangered madagascar fish eagle h vociferoides like all sea eagle species pairs this one consists of a whiteheaded 
species the african fish eagle and a tanheaded one these are an ancient lineage of sea eagles and as such have dark 
talons beaks and eyes both species have at least partially white tails even as juveniles the scientific name is derived 
from haliaeetus new latin for sea eagle from the ancient greek haliaetos and vocifer is derived from its original genus 
name so named by the french naturalist franois levaillant who called it the vociferous one description the african fish 
eagle is a large bird and the female at kg lbs is larger than the male at kg lbs this is typical of sexual dimorphism in 
birds of prey males usually have a wingspan of about m feet while females have wingspans of m feet the body length is cm 
in the adult is very distinctive in appearance with a mostly brown body and large powerful black wings the head breast 
and tail of african fish eagles are snow white with the exception of the featherless face which is yellow the eyes are 
dark brown in colour the hookshaped beak ideal for a carnivorous lifestyle is yellow with a black tip the plumage of the 
juvenile is brown in colour and the eyes are paler compared to the adult the feet have rough soles and are equipped with 
powerful talons in order to enable the eagle to grasp slippery aquatic prey while this species mainly subsists on fish 
it is opportunistic and may take a wider variety of prey such as waterbirds its distinctive cry is for many evocative of 
the spirit or essence of africa the call shriller when uttered by males is a weeeah hyohyo or a heeeah heeahheeah 
distribution and habitat this species is still quite common near freshwater lakes reservoirs and rivers although they 
can sometimes be found near the coast at the mouths of rivers or lagoons as their name implies african fish eagles are 
indigenous to subsaharan africa ranging over most of continental africa south of the sahara desert several examples of 
places where they may be resident include the orange river in south africa and namibia the okavango delta in botswana 
and lake malawi bordering its namesake country malawi tanzania and mozambique the african fish eagle is thought to occur 
in substantial numbers around the locations of lake victoria and other large lakes that are found in central africa 
particularly the rift valley lakes the african fish eagle is a generalist species requiring only open water with 
sufficient prey and a good perch this is evident by the number of habitat types that this species may be found in 
including grassland swamps marshes tropical rainforest fynbos and even desert bordering coastlines such as that of 
namibia the african fish eagle is absent from arid areas with little surface water reproduction breeding season for 
african fish eagles is during the dry season when water levels are low african fish eagles are believed to be monogamous 
in other words they mate for life pairs will often maintain two or more nests which they will frequently reuse because 
nests are reused and built upon over the years the nests can grow to be quite large some reaching m six feet across and 
m feet deep the nests are placed in a large tree and built mostly of sticks and other pieces of wood the female lays to 
eggs which are primarily white with a few reddish speckles incubation is mostly done by the female but the male will 
incubate when the female leaves to hunt incubation lasts for to days before the chicks hatch siblicide does not normally 
occur in this taxon and the parents will often successfully rear two or three chicks chicks fledge at approx to days 
post fledgeling dependence lasts up to three months diet the african fish eagle feeds mainly on fish which it will swoop 
down upon from a perch in a tree snatching the prey from the water with its large clawed talons the eagle will then fly 
back to its perch to eat its catch like other sea eagles the african fish eagle has structures on its toes called 
spiricules that allows it to grasp fish and other slippery prey the osprey a winter visitor to africa also has this 
adaptation should the african fish eagle catch a fish over kg pounds it will be too heavy to allow the eagle to get lift 
so it will instead drag the fish across the surface of the water until it reaches the shore if it catches a fish that is 
too heavy to even allow the eagle to sustain flight it will drop into the water and paddle to the nearest shore with its 
wings the african fish eagle is known to peculate other bird species such as goliath herons of their catch this 
behaviour is known as kleptoparasitism it will also feed on waterfowl such as ducks small turtles and terrapins baby 
crocodiles greater flamingos and lesser flamingos lizards such as nile monitors frogs and carrion occasionally it may 
even carry off mammalian prey such as hyraxes and monkeys it has also been observed feeding on domestic fowl chickens 
relationship with humans conservation this species is listed as least concern by iucn the estimated population size is 
about individuals with a distribution area of km heraldry the bird figures in the coat of arms of namibia and the coat 
of arms of zambia it also appears on the coat of arms of south sudan against two crossed bush spears and a shield 
gallery footnotes references birdlife international haliaeetus vocifer iucn red list of threatened species version 
international union for conservation of nature retrieved november wink m heidrich p fentzloff c a mtdna phylogeny of sea 
eagles genus haliaeetus based on nucleotide sequences of the cytochrome b gene pdf biochemical systematics and ecology 
doisx external links african fish eagle species text in the atlas of southern african birds joao