
the african buffalo or cape buffalo syncerus caffer is a large african bovine it is not closely related to the slightly 
larger wild asian water buffalo and its ancestry remains unclear syncerus caffer caffer the cape buffalo is the typical 
subspecies and the largest one found in south and east africa s c nanus forest buffalo is the smallest subspecies common 
in forest areas of central and west africa while s c brachyceros is in west africa and s c aequinoctialis is in the 
savannas of central africa the adult buffalos horns is its characteristic feature it has fused bases forming a 
continuous bone shield referred to as a boss it is widely regarded as a very dangerous animal as it gores and kills over 
people every year the african buffalo is not an ancestor of domestic cattle and is only distantly related to other 
larger bovines owing to its unpredictable nature which makes it highly dangerous to humans the african buffalo has never 
been domesticated unlike its asian counterpart the water buffalo other than humans african cape buffaloes have few 
predators and are capable of defending themselves the buffaloes are the lions primary prey being a member of the big 
five game family the cape buffalo is a soughtafter trophy in hunting description the african buffalo is a very robust 
species its shoulder height can range from to m to ft and its headandbody length can range from to m to ft compared with 
other large bovids it has a long but stocky body the body length can exceed the wild water buffalo which is rather 
heavier and taller and short but thickset legs resulting in a relatively short standing height the tail can range from 
to cm to in long savannahtype buffaloes weigh to kg to lb with males normally larger than females reaching the upper 
weight range in comparison foresttype buffaloes at to kg to lb are only half that size its head is carried low its top 
is located below the backline the front hooves of the buffalo are wider than the rear which is associated with the need 
to support the weight of the front part of the body which is heavier and more powerful than the back savannahtype 
buffaloes have black or dark brown coats with age old bulls have whitish circles around their eyes females tend to have 
morereddish coats foresttype buffaloes are reddish brown in colour with horns that curve back and slightly up calves of 
both types have red coats the horns of african buffalo are very peculiar a characteristic feature of them is the adult 
bulls horns have fused bases forming a continuous bone shield referred to as a boss which can not always be penetrated 
even by a rifle bullet from the base the horns diverge then bend down and then smoothly curve upwards and outwards the 
distance between the ends of the horns of large bulls is more than a metre the young buffalo horn boss forms fully only 
upon reaching the age of five to six years in cows the horns are on average smaller and the boss is less prominent 
forest buffalo horns are much smaller and weaker than those of the savannah buffaloes and are almost never fused they 
rarely can reach a length of even centimetres in subspecies syncerus caffer caffer the cape buffalo is the typical 
subspecies and the largest one with large males weighing up to kg lb it is peculiar to south and east africa buffaloes 
of this subspecies living in the south of the continent notably tall in size and ferocity are the socalled cape buffalo 
color of this subspecies is the darkest almost black s c nanus forest buffalo is the smallest subspecies the height at 
the withers is less than cm and average weight is about kg lb their color is red with darker patches on the head and 
shoulders in the ears forming a brush the dwarf buffalo is common in forest areas of central and west africa this 
subspecies is so different from the standard model some researchers consider it still a separate species s nanus hybrids 
between the typical subspecies and dwarf are not uncommon s c brachyceros sudanese buffalo is in morphological terms 
intermediate between those two subspecies it occurs in west africa its dimensions are relatively small especially 
compared to other buffalo found in cameroon which weigh half as much as the south african subspecies bulls weighing kg 
lb are considered to be very large s c aequinoctialis nile buffalo is confined to the savannas of central africa it is 
similar to the cape buffalo but somewhat smaller and its color is lighter this subspecies is sometimes included in the 
sudanese buffalo s c mathewsi mountain buffalo is not universally recognized it lives in mountainous areas of east 
africa ecology the african buffalo is one of the most successful grazers in africa it lives in swamps and floodplains as 
well as mopane grasslands and forests of the major mountains of africa this buffalo prefers habitat with dense cover 
such as reeds and thickets but can also be found in open woodland while not particularly demanding with regard to 
habitat they require water daily so depend on perennial sources of water like the plains zebra the buffalo can live on 
tall coarse grasses herds of buffalo mow down grasses and make way for more selective grazers when feeding the buffalo 
makes use of its tongue and wide incisor row to eat grass more quickly than most other african herbivores buffaloes do 
not stay on trampled or depleted areas for long other than humans african cape buffaloes have few predators and are 
capable of defending themselves against and killing lions lions do kill and eat buffalo regularly and in some regions 
the buffaloes are the lions primary prey it typically takes several lions to bring down a single adult buffalo however 
several incidents have been reported in which lone adult male lions have been able to successfully bring down adult 
animals the nile crocodile will typically attack only old solitary animals and young calves though they can kill healthy 
adults the cheetah leopard and spotted hyena are a threat only to newborn calves though spotted hyenas have been 
recorded killing full grown bulls on rare occasions diseases the cape buffalo is susceptible to many diseases including 
bovine tuberculosis corridor disease and foot and mouth disease as with many diseases these problems will remain dormant 
within a population as long as the health of the animals is good these diseases do however restrict the legal movements 
of the animals and fencing infected areas from unaffected areas is enforced some wardens and game managers have managed 
to protect and breed diseasefree herds which become very valuable because they can be transported most wellknown are 
lindsay hunts efforts to source uninfected animals from the kruger national park in south africa some diseasefree 
buffaloes in south africa have been sold to breeders for close to us social behavior herd size is highly variable the 
core of the herds is made up of related females and their offspring in an almost linear dominance hierarchy the basic 
herds are surrounded by subherds of subordinate males highranking males and females and old or invalid animals the young 
males keep their distance from the dominant bull who is recognizable by the thickness of his horns during the dry season 
males will split from the herd and form bachelor groups two types of bachelor herds occur ones made of males aged four 
to seven years and those of males years or older during the wet season the younger bulls rejoin a herd to mate with the 
females they stay with them throughout the season to protect the calves some older bulls cease to rejoin the herd as 
they can no longer compete with the younger more aggressive males males have a linear dominance hierarchy based on age 
and size since a buffalo is safer when a herd is larger dominant bulls may rely on subordinate bulls and sometimes 
tolerate their copulation adult bulls will spar in play dominance interactions or actual fights a bull will approach 
another lowing with his horns down and wait for the other bull to do the same thing when sparring the bulls twist their 
horns from side to side if the sparring is for play the bull may rub its opponents face and body during the sparring 
session actual fights are violent but rare and brief calves may also spar in play but adult females rarely spar at all 
african buffaloes are notable for their apparent altruism females appear to exhibit some sort of voting behavior during 
resting time the females will stand up shuffle around and sit back down again they will sit in the direction they think 
they should move after an hour of more shuffling the females will travel in the direction they decide this decision is 
communal and not based on hierarchy or dominance when chased by predators a herd will stick close together and make it 
hard for the predators to pick off one member calves are gathered in the middle a buffalo herd will respond to the 
distress call of a captured member and try to rescue it a calfs distress call will get the attention of not only the 
mother but also the herd buffaloes will engage in mobbing behavior when fighting off predators they have been recorded 
killing a lion and chasing lions up a tree and keeping them there for two hours after the lions have killed a member of 
their group lion cubs can get trampled and killed in one videotaped instance known as the battle at kruger a calf 
survived an attack by both lions and a crocodile after intervention of the herd vocalizations african buffaloes make 
various vocalizations many calls are lowerpitched versions of those emitted by domestic cattle they emit lowpitched two 
to foursecond calls intermittently at three to sixsecond intervals to signal the herd to move to signal to the herd to 
change direction leaders will emit gritty creaking gate sounds when moving to drinking places some individuals make long 
maaa calls up to times a minute when being aggressive they make explosive grunts that may last long or turn into 
rumbling growl cows produce croaking calls when looking for their calves calves will make a similar call of a higher 
pitch when in distress when threatened by predators they make drawnout waaaa calls dominant individuals make calls to 
announce their presence and location a more intense version of the same call is emitted as a warning to an encroaching 
inferior when grazing they will make various sounds such as brief bellows grunts honks and croaks reproduction buffaloes 
mate and give birth only during the rainy seasons birth peak takes place early in the season while mating peaks later a 
bull will closely guard a cow that comes into heat while keeping other bulls at bay this is difficult as cows are quite 
evasive and attract many males to the scene by the time a cow is in full estrus only the most dominant bull in the 
herdsubherd is there cows first calve at five years of age after a gestation period of months newborn calves remain 
hidden in vegetation for the first few weeks while being nursed occasionally by the mother before joining the main herd 
older calves are held in the centre of the herd for safety the maternal bond between mother and calf lasts longer than 
in most bovids however when a new calf is born the bonding ends and the mother will keep her previous offspring at bay 
with horn jabs nevertheless the yearling will follow its mother for another year or so males leave their mothers when 
they are two years old and join the bachelor groups young calves unusually for bovids suckle from behind their mothers 
pushing their heads between the mothers legs relationship with humans status the current status of african cape buffalo 
is dependent on the animals value to both trophy hunters and tourists paving the way for conservation efforts through 
antipoaching patrols village crop damage payouts and campfire payback programs to local areas the buffalo is listed as 
least concern by the iucn as the species remains widespread with a global population estimated at nearly animals of 
which more than threequarters are in protected areas while some populations subspecies are decreasing others will remain 
unchanged in the long term if large healthy populations continue to persist in a substantial number of national parks 
equivalent reserves and hunting zones in southern and eastern africa in the most recent and available census data at 
continental scale the total estimated numbers of the three african buffalo savanna subspecies s c caffer s c brachyceros 
s c aequinoctialis are at individuals in the past numbers of african buffaloes suffered their most severe collapse 
during the great rinderpest epidemic of the s which coupled with pleuropneumonia caused mortalities as high as among 
livestock and wild ungulates being a member of the big five game family a term originally used to describe the five most 
dangerous animals to hunt the cape buffalo is a soughtafter trophy with some hunters paying over for the opportunity to 
hunt one the larger bulls are targeted for their trophy value although in some areas buffaloes are still hunted for meat 
attacks other than one of the big five it is known as the black death or widowmaker and is widely regarded as a very 
dangerous animal as it gores and kills over people every year buffaloes are sometimes reported to kill more people in 
africa than any other animal although the same claim is also made of hippos and crocodiles buffaloes are notorious among 
big game hunters as very dangerous animals with wounded animals reported to ambush and attack pursuers see also anoa 
gaur zebu the common type of cattle from india gaur may have contributed to some breeds references further reading 
melletti m and burton j eds ecology evolution and behaviour of wild cattle implications for conservation cambridge 
university press httpwwwcambridgeorg usacademicsubjectslifesciences animalbehaviourecologyevolutionandbehaviour 
wildcattleimplicationsconservation ecology and behaviour of the african buffalo social inequality and decision making 
chapman hall wildlife ecology behaviour huffman b the ultimate ungulate page ultimateungulatecom retrieved january 
international union for conservation of nature and natural resources iucn syncerus caffer nowak rm and paradiso jl 
walkers mammals of the world baltimore maryland usa the johns hopkins university press isbn external links videobattle 
kruger african buffalo images
