africa is the worlds secondlargest and secondmostpopulous continent at about million km million sq mi including adjacent 
islands it covers six percent of earths total surface area and percent of its total land area with billion people as of 
it accounts for about of the worlds human population the continent is surrounded by the mediterranean sea to the north
both the suez canal and the red sea along the sinai peninsula to the northeast the indian ocean to the southeast and the 
atlantic ocean to the west the continent includes madagascar and various archipelagos it has fully recognized sovereign 
states countries nine territories and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition africas population 
is the youngest among all the continents of africans are years old or younger algeria is africas largest country by area 
and nigeria by population africa particularly central eastern africa is widely accepted as the place of origin of humans 
and the hominidae clade great apes as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors as well as 
later ones that have been dated to around seven million years ago including sahelanthropus tchadensis australopithecus 
africanus a afarensis homo erectus h habilis and h ergaster with the earliest homo sapiens modern human found in 
ethiopia being dated to circa years ago africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas it is the 
only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones etymology afri was a latin name used 
to refer to the carthaginians who dwelt in north africa in modernday tunisia this name seems to have originally referred 
to a native libyan tribe however see terencebiography for discussion the name is usually connected with phoenician afar 
dust but a hypothesis has asserted that it stems from the berber ifri plural ifran cave in reference to cave dwellers 
the same word may be found in the name of the banu ifran from algeria and tripolitania a berber tribe originally from 
yafran also known as ifrane in northwestern libya under roman rule carthage became the capital of africa province which 
also included the coastal part of modern libya the latin suffix ica can sometimes be used to denote a land eg in celtica 
from celtae as used by julius caesar the later muslim kingdom of ifriqiya modernday tunisia also preserved a form of the 
name according to the ancient romans africa lay to the west of egypt while asia was used to refer to anatolia and lands 
to the east a definite line was drawn between the two continents by the geographer ptolemy ad indicating alexandria 
along the prime meridian and making the isthmus of suez and the red sea the boundary between asia and africa as 
europeans came to understand the real extent of the continent the idea of africa expanded with their knowledge other 
etymological hypotheses have been postulated for the ancient name africa the stcentury jewish historian flavius josephus 
ant asserted that it was named for epher grandson of abraham according to gen whose descendants he claimed had invaded 
libya isidore of seville in etymologiae xiv suggests the latin aprica sunny massey in states that africa is derived from 
the egyptian afruika to turn toward the opening of the ka the ka is the energetic double of every person and opening of 
the ka refers to a womb or birthplace africa would be for the egyptians the birthplace yet another hypothesis was 
proposed by michle fruyt linking the latin word with africus south wind which would be of umbrian origin and mean 
originally rainy wind history prehistory africa is considered by most paleoanthropologists to be the oldest inhabited 
territory on earth with the human species originating from the continent during the middle of the th century 
anthropologists discovered many fossils and evidence of human occupation perhaps as early as million years ago fossil 
remains of several species of early apelike humans thought to have evolved into modern man such as australopithecus 
afarensis radiometrically dated to approximately million years bc paranthropus boisei c million years bc and homo 
ergaster c million years bc have been discovered after the evolution of homo sapiens sapiens approximately to years ago 
in africa the continent was mainly populated by groups of huntergatherers these first modern humans left africa and 
populated the rest of the globe during the out of africa migration dated to approximately years ago exiting the 
continent either across babelmandeb over the red sea the strait of gibraltar in morocco or the isthmus of suez in egypt 
other migrations of these modern humans within the african continent have been dated to that time with evidence of early 
human settlement found in southern africa southeast africa north africa and the sahara the size of the sahara has 
historically been extremely variable with its area rapidly fluctuating and at times disappearing depending on global 
climactic conditions at the end of the ice ages estimated to have been around bc the sahara had again become a green 
fertile valley and its african populations returned from the interior and coastal highlands in subsaharan africa with 
rock art paintings depicting a fertile sahara and large populations discovered in tassili najjer dating back perhaps 
millennia however the warming and drying climate meant that by bc the sahara region was becoming increasingly dry and 
hostile around bc due to a tilt in the earths orbit the sahara experienced a period of rapid desertification the 
population trekked out of the sahara region towards the nile valley below the second cataract where they made permanent 
or semipermanent settlements a major climatic recession occurred lessening the heavy and persistent rains in central and 
eastern africa since this time dry conditions have prevailed in eastern africa and increasingly during the last years in 
ethiopia the domestication of cattle in africa preceded agriculture and seems to have existed alongside huntergatherer 
cultures it is speculated that by bc cattle were already domesticated in north africa in the saharanile complex people 
domesticated many animals including the donkey and a small screwhorned goat which was common from algeria to nubia in 
the year bc the climate of the sahara started to become drier at an exceedingly fast pace this climate change caused 
lakes and rivers to shrink significantly and caused increasing desertification this in turn decreased the amount of land 
conducive to settlements and helped to cause migrations of farming communities to the more tropical climate of west 
africa by the first millennium bc ironworking had been introduced in northern africa and quickly spread across the 
sahara into the northern parts of subsaharan africa and by bc metalworking began to become commonplace in west africa 
ironworking was fully established by roughly bc in many areas of east and west africa although other regions didnt begin 
ironworking until the early centuries ad copper objects from egypt north africa nubia and ethiopia dating from around bc 
have been excavated in west africa suggesting that transsaharan trade networks had been established by this date early 
civilizations at about bc the historical record opens in northern africa with the rise of literacy in the pharaonic 
civilization of ancient egypt one of the worlds earliest and longestlasting civilizations the egyptian state continued 
with varying levels of influence over other areas until bc egyptian influence reached deep into modernday libya and 
nubia and according to martin bernal as far north as crete an independent center of civilization with trading links to 
phoenicia was established by phoenicians from tyre on the northwest african coast at carthage european exploration of 
africa began with ancient greeks and romans in bc alexander the great was welcomed as a liberator in persianoccupied 
egypt he founded alexandria in egypt which would become the prosperous capital of the ptolemaic dynasty after his death 
following the conquest of north africas mediterranean coastline by the roman empire the area was integrated economically 
and culturally into the roman system roman settlement occurred in modern tunisia and elsewhere along the coast the first 
roman emperor native to north africa was septimius severus born in leptis magna in presentday libyahis mother was 
italian roman and his father was punic christianity spread across these areas at an early date from judaea via egypt and 
beyond the borders of the roman world into nubia by ad at the latest it had become the state religion of the aksumite 
empire syrogreek missionaries who arrived by way of the red sea were responsible for this theological development in the 
early th century the newly formed arabian islamic caliphate expanded into egypt and then into north africa in a short 
while the local berber elite had been integrated into muslim arab tribes when the umayyad capital damascus fell in the 
th century the islamic center of the mediterranean shifted from syria to qayrawan in north africa islamic north africa 
had become diverse and a hub for mystics scholars jurists and philosophers during the abovementioned period islam spread 
to subsaharan africa mainly through trade routes and migration ninth to eighteenth centuries precolonial africa 
possessed perhaps as many as different states and polities characterized by many different sorts of political 
organization and rule these included small family groups of huntergatherers such as the san people of southern africa 
larger more structured groups such as the family clan groupings of the bantuspeaking peoples of central southern and 
eastern africa heavily structured clan groups in the horn of africa the large sahelian kingdoms and autonomous 
citystates and kingdoms such as those of the akan edo yoruba and igbo people in west africa and the swahili coastal 
trading towns of southeast africa by the ninth century a string of dynastic states including the earliest hausa states 
stretched across the subsaharan savannah from the western regions to central sudan the most powerful of these states 
were ghana gao and the kanembornu empire ghana declined in the eleventh century but was succeeded by the mali empire 
which consolidated much of western sudan in the thirteenth century kanem accepted islam in the eleventh century in the 
forested regions of the west african coast independent kingdoms grew up with little influence from the muslim north the 
kingdom of nri was established around the ninth century and was one of the first it is also one of the oldest kingdoms 
in presentday nigeria and was ruled by the eze nri the nri kingdom is famous for its elaborate bronzes found at the town 
of igboukwu the bronzes have been dated from as far back as the ninth century the kingdom of ife historically the first 
of these yoruba citystates or kingdoms established government under a priestly oba king or ruler in the yoruba language 
called the ooni of ife ife was noted as a major religious and cultural center in west africa and for its unique 
naturalistic tradition of bronze sculpture the ife model of government was adapted at the oyo empire where its obas or 
kings called the alaafins of oyo once controlled a large number of other yoruba and nonyoruba citystates and kingdoms 
the fon kingdom of dahomey was one of the nonyoruba domains under oyo control the almoravids were a berber dynasty from 
the sahara that spread over a wide area of northwestern africa and the iberian peninsula during the eleventh century the 
banu hilal and banu maqil were a collection of arab bedouin tribes from the arabian peninsula who migrated westwards via 
egypt between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries their migration resulted in the fusion of the arabs and berbers 
where the locals were arabized and arab culture absorbed elements of the local culture under the unifying framework of 
islam following the breakup of mali a local leader named sonni ali founded the songhai empire in the region of middle 
niger and the western sudan and took control of the transsaharan trade sonni ali seized timbuktu in and jenne in 
building his regime on trade revenues and the cooperation of muslim merchants his successor askia mohammad i made islam 
the official religion built mosques and brought to gao muslim scholars including almaghili d the founder of an important 
tradition of sudanic african muslim scholarship by the eleventh century some hausa states such as kano jigawa katsina 
and gobir had developed into walled towns engaging in trade servicing caravans and the manufacture of goods until the 
fifteenth century these small states were on the periphery of the major sudanic empires of the era paying tribute to 
songhai to the west and kanemborno to the east height of slave trade slavery had long been practiced in africa between 
the th and th centuries arab slave trade also known as slavery in the east took million slaves from africa via 
transsaharan and indian ocean routes between the th and the th centuries years the atlantic slave trade took an 
estimated million slaves to the new world more than million europeans were captured by barbary pirates and sold as 
slaves in north africa between the th and th centuries in west africa the decline of the atlantic slave trade in the s 
caused dramatic economic shifts in local polities the gradual decline of slavetrading prompted by a lack of demand for 
slaves in the new world increasing antislavery legislation in europe and america and the british royal navys increasing 
presence off the west african coast obliged african states to adopt new economies between and the british west africa 
squadron seized approximately slave ships and freed africans who were aboard action was also taken against african 
leaders who refused to agree to british treaties to outlaw the trade for example against the usurping king of lagos 
deposed in antislavery treaties were signed with over african rulers the largest powers of west africa the asante 
confederacy the kingdom of dahomey and the oyo empire adopted different ways of adapting to the shift asante and dahomey 
concentrated on the development of legitimate commerce in the form of palm oil cocoa timber and gold forming the bedrock 
of west africas modern export trade the oyo empire unable to adapt collapsed into civil wars colonialism and the 
scramble for africa in the late th century the european imperial powers engaged in a major territorial scramble and 
occupied most of the continent creating many colonial territories and leaving only two fully independent states ethiopia 
known to europeans as abyssinia and liberia egypt and sudan were never formally incorporated into any european colonial 
empire however after the british occupation of egypt was effectively under british administration until berlin 
conference the berlin conference held in was an important event in the political future of african ethnic groups it was 
convened by king leopold ii of belgium and attended by the european powers that laid claim to african territories it 
sought to bring an end to the scramble for africa by european powers by agreeing on political division and spheres of 
influence they set up the political divisions of the continent by spheres of interest that exist in africa today 
independence struggles imperial rule by europeans would continue until after the conclusion of world war ii when almost 
all remaining colonial territories gradually obtained formal independence independence movements in africa gained 
momentum following world war ii which left the major european powers weakened in libya a former italian colony gained 
independence in tunisia and morocco won their independence from france ghana followed suit the next year march becoming 
the first of the subsaharan colonies to be freed most of the rest of the continent became independent over the next 
decade portugals overseas presence in subsaharan africa most notably in angola cape verde mozambique guineabissau and so 
tom and prncipe lasted from the th century to after the estado novo regime was overthrown in a military coup in lisbon 
rhodesia unilaterally declared independence from the united kingdom in under the white minority government of ian smith 
but was not internationally recognized as an independent state as zimbabwe until when black nationalists gained power 
after a bitter guerrilla war although south africa was one of the first african countries to gain independence the state 
remained under the control of the countrys white minority through a system of racial segregation known as apartheid 
until postcolonial africa today africa contains sovereign countries most of which have borders that were drawn during 
the era of european colonialism since colonialism african states have frequently been hampered by instability corruption 
violence and authoritarianism the vast majority of african states are republics that operate under some form of the 
presidential system of rule however few of them have been able to sustain democratic governments on a permanent basis 
and many have instead cycled through a series of coups producing military dictatorships great instability was mainly the 
result of marginalization of ethnic groups and graft under these leaders for political gain many leaders fanned ethnic 
conflicts some of which had been exacerbated or even created by colonial rule in many countries the military was 
perceived as being the only group that could effectively maintain order and it ruled many nations in africa during the s 
and early s during the period from the early s to the late s africa had more than coups and presidential assassinations 
border and territorial disputes were also common with the europeanimposed borders of many nations being widely contested 
through armed conflicts cold war conflicts between the united states and the soviet union as well as the policies of the 
international monetary fund also played a role in instability when a country became independent for the first time it 
was often expected to align with one of the two superpowers many countries in northern africa received soviet military 
aid while others in central and southern africa were supported by the united states france or both the s saw an 
escalation as newly independent angola and mozambique aligned themselves with the soviet union and the west and south 
africa sought to contain soviet influence by backing friendly regimes or insurgency movements there was a major famine 
in ethiopia when hundreds of thousands of people starved some claimed that marxist economic policies made the situation 
worse the most devastating military conflict in modern independent africa has been the second congo war this conflict 
and its aftermath has killed an estimated million people since there has been an ongoing conflict in darfur which has 
become a humanitarian disaster another notable tragic event is the rwandan genocide in which an estimated people were 
murdered aids in postcolonial africa has also been a prevalent issue in the st century however the number of armed 
conflicts in africa has steadily declined for instance the civil war in angola came to an end in after nearly years this 
has coincided with many countries abandoning communist style command economies and opening up for market reforms the 
improved stability and economic reforms have led to a great increase in foreign investment into many african nations 
mainly from china which has spurred quick economic growth in many countries seemingly ending decades of stagnation and 
decline several african economies are among the worlds fastest growing as of a significant part of this growth can also 
be attributed to the facilitated diffusion of information technologies and specifically the mobile telephone geography 
africa is the largest of the three great southward projections from the largest landmass of the earth separated from 
europe by the mediterranean sea it is joined to asia at its northeast extremity by the isthmus of suez transected by the 
suez canal km mi wide geopolitically egypts sinai peninsula east of the suez canal is often considered part of africa as 
well from the most northerly point ras ben sakka in tunisia n to the most southerly point cape agulhas in south africa s 
is a distance of approximately km mi from cape verde w the westernmost point to ras hafun in somalia e the most easterly 
projection is a distance of approximately km mi the coastline is km mi long and the absence of deep indentations of the 
shore is illustrated by the fact that europe which covers only km sq mi about a third of the surface of africa has a 
coastline of km mi africas largest country is algeria and its smallest country is the seychelles an archipelago off the 
east coast the smallest nation on the continental mainland is the gambia geologically africa includes the arabian 
peninsula the zagros mountains of iran and the anatolian plateau of turkey mark where the african plate collided with 
eurasia the afrotropic ecozone and the saharoarabian desert to its north unite the region biogeographically and the 
afroasiatic language family unites the north linguistically climate the climate of africa ranges from tropical to 
subarctic on its highest peaks its northern half is primarily desert or arid while its central and southern areas 
contain both savanna plains and very dense jungle rainforest regions in between there is a convergence where vegetation 
patterns such as sahel and steppe dominate africa is the hottest continent on earth and of the entire land surface 
consists of drylands and deserts the record for the highestever recorded temperature in libya in c f was discredited in 
fauna africa boasts perhaps the worlds largest combination of density and range of freedom of wild animal populations 
and diversity with wild populations of large carnivores such as lions hyenas and cheetahs and herbivores such as buffalo 
elephants camels and giraffes ranging freely on primarily open nonprivate plains it is also home to a variety of jungle 
animals including snakes and primates and aquatic life such as crocodiles and amphibians in addition africa has the 
largest number of megafauna species as it was least affected by the extinction of the pleistocene megafauna ecology and 
biodiversity deforestation is affecting africa at twice the world rate according to the united nations environment 
programme unep according to the university of pennsylvania african studies center of africas pasture lands and of its 
forests and woodlands are classified as degraded and africa is losing over four million hectares of forest every year 
which is twice the average deforestation rate compared to the rest of the world some sources claim that approximately of 
the original virgin forests in west africa have been destroyed over of madagascars original forests have been destroyed 
since the arrival of humans years ago about of africas agricultural land suffers from soil degradation africa has over 
protected areas with marine protected areas biosphere reserves and wetlands reserves significant habitat destruction 
increases in human population and poaching are reducing africas biological diversity human encroachment civil unrest and 
the introduction of nonnative species threatens biodiversity in africa this has been exacerbated by administrative 
problems inadequate personnel and funding problems politics there are clear signs of increased networking among african 
organizations and states for example in the civil war in the democratic republic of the congo former zaire rather than 
rich nonafrican countries intervening neighboring african countries became involved see also second congo war since the 
conflict began in the estimated death toll has reached million the african union the african union au is a member 
federation consisting of all of africas states except morocco the union was formed with addis ababa ethiopia as its 
headquarters on june the union was officially established on july as a successor to the organisation of african unity 
oau in july the african unions panafrican parliament pap was relocated to midrand in south africa but the african 
commission on human and peoples rights remained in addis ababa there is a policy in effect to decentralize the african 
federations institutions so that they are shared by all the states the african union not to be confused with the au 
commission is formed by the constitutive act of the african union which aims to transform the african economic community 
a federated commonwealth into a state under established international conventions the african union has a parliamentary 
government known as the african union government consisting of legislative judicial and executive organs it is led by 
the african union president and head of state who is also the president of the panafrican parliament a person becomes au 
president by being elected to the pap and subsequently gaining majority support in the pap the powers and authority of 
the president of the african parliament derive from the constitutive act and the protocol of the panafrican parliament 
as well as the inheritance of presidential authority stipulated by african treaties and by international treaties 
including those subordinating the secretary general of the oau secretariat au commission to the pap the government of 
the au consists of allunion federal regional state and municipal authorities as well as hundreds of institutions that 
together manage the daytoday affairs of the institution political associations such as the african union offer hope for 
greater cooperation and peace between the continents many countries extensive human rights abuses still occur in several 
parts of africa often under the oversight of the state most of such violations occur for political reasons often as a 
side effect of civil war countries where major human rights violations have been reported in recent times include the 
democratic republic of the congo sierra leone liberia sudan zimbabwe and cte divoire economy although it has abundant 
natural resources africa remains the worlds poorest and most underdeveloped continent the result of a variety of causes 
that may include corrupt governments that have often committed serious human rights violations failed central planning 
high levels of illiteracy lack of access to foreign capital and frequent tribal and military conflict ranging from 
guerrilla warfare to genocide according to the united nations human development report in the bottom ranked nations st 
to th were all african poverty illiteracy malnutrition and inadequate water supply and sanitation as well as poor health 
affect a large proportion of the people who reside in the african continent in august the world bank announced revised 
global poverty estimates based on a new international poverty line of per day versus the previous measure of of the 
subsaharan africa population was living on less than ppp a day in compared with for india the new figures confirm that 
subsaharan africa has been the least successful region of the world in reducing poverty per day some of the population 
living in poverty in million people a figure that rose to in before dropping to in million people the average poor 
person in subsaharan africa is estimated to live on only cents per day and was poorer in than he or she was in 
indicating increasing poverty in some areas some of it is attributed to unsuccessful economic liberalization programs 
spearheaded by foreign companies and governments but other studies and reports have cited bad domestic government 
policies more than external factors from to africas rate of economic growth increased averaging in some countries 
experienced still higher growth rates notably angola sudan and equatorial guinea all three of which had recently begun 
extracting their petroleum reserves or had expanded their oil extraction capacity the continent is believed to hold of 
the worlds cobalt of its platinum of its gold of its chromium of its tantalite of its manganese and onethird of its 
uranium the democratic republic of the congo drc has of the worlds coltan a mineral used in the production of tantalum 
capacitors for electronic devices such as cell phones the drc also has more than of the worlds diamond reserves guinea 
is the worlds largest exporter of bauxite as the growth in africa has been driven mainly by services and not 
manufacturing or agriculture it has been growth without jobs and without reduction in poverty levels in fact the food 
security crisis of which took place on the heels of the global financial crisis has pushed back million people into food 
insecurity in recent years the peoples republic of china has built increasingly stronger ties with african nations in 
chinese companies invested a total of us billion in africa a harvard university study led by professor calestous juma 
showed that africa could feed itself by making the transition from importer to selfsufficiency african agriculture is at 
the crossroads says dr juma juma also states we have come to the end of a century of policies that favored africas 
export of raw materials and importation of food africa is starting to focus on agricultural innovation as its new engine 
for regional trade and prosperity during the president of the united states barack obamas visit to africa in july he 
announced a us billion plan to further develop infrastructure and work more intensively with african heads of state a 
new program named trade africa designed to boost trade within the continent as well as between africa and the us was 
also unveiled by obama demographics africas population has rapidly increased over the last years and consequently it is 
relatively young in some african states half or more of the population is under years of age the total number of people 
in africa increased from million in to billion in speakers of bantu languages part of the nigercongo family are the 
majority in southern central and southeast africa the bantuspeaking peoples from west africa progressively expanded over 
most of subsaharan africa but there are also several nilotic groups in south sudan and east africa the mixed swahili 
people on the swahili coast and a few remaining indigenous khoisan san or bushmen and pygmy peoples in southern and 
central africa respectively bantuspeaking africans also predominate in gabon and equatorial guinea and are found in 
parts of southern cameroon in the kalahari desert of southern africa the distinct people known as the bushmen also san 
closely related to but distinct from hottentots have long been present the san are physically distinct from other 
africans and are the indigenous people of southern africa pygmies are the prebantu indigenous peoples of central africa 
the peoples of west africa primarily speak nigercongo languages belonging mostly though not exclusively to its nonbantu 
branches though some nilosaharan and afroasiatic speaking groups are also found the nigercongospeaking yoruba igbo 
fulani akan and wolof ethnic groups are the largest and most influential in the central sahara mandinka or mande groups 
are most significant chadicspeaking groups including the hausa are found in more northerly parts of the region nearest 
to the sahara and nilosaharan communities such as the songhai kanuri and zarma are found in the eastern parts of west 
africa bordering central africa the peoples of north africa consist of three main indigenous groups berbers in the 
northwest egyptians in the northeast and nilosaharanspeaking peoples in the east the arabs who arrived in the th century 
introduced the arabic language and islam to north africa the semitic phoenicians who founded carthage and hyksos the 
indoiranian alans the indo european greeks romans and vandals settled in north africa as well significant berber 
communities remain within morocco and algeria in the st century while to a lesser extent berber speakers are also 
present in some regions of tunisia and libya the berberspeaking tuareg and other oftennomadic peoples are the principal 
inhabitants of the saharan interior of north africa in mauritania there is a small but nearextinct berber community in 
the north and nigercongospeaking peoples in the south though in both regions arabic and arab culture predominates in 
sudan although arabic and arab culture predominate it is mostly inhabited by groups that originally spoke nilosaharan 
such as the nubians fur masalit and zaghawa who over the centuries have variously intermixed with migrants from the 
arabian peninsula small communities of afroasiaticspeaking beja nomads can also be found in egypt and sudan in the horn 
of africa some ethiopian and eritrean groups like the amhara and tigrayans collectively known as habesha speak languages 
from the semitic branch of the afroasiatic language family while the oromo and somali speak languages from the cushitic 
branch of afroasiatic prior to the decolonization movements of the postworld war ii era europeans were represented in 
every part of africa decolonization during the s and s often resulted in the mass emigration of white settlers 
especially from algeria and morocco million piedsnoirs in north africa kenya congo rhodesia mozambique and angola 
between and over a million colonials returned to portugal alone nevertheless white africans remain an important minority 
in many african states particularly zimbabwe namibia runion and the republic of south africa the country with the 
largest white african population is south africa dutch and british diasporas represent the largest communities of 
european ancestry on the continent today european colonization also brought sizable groups of asians particularly people 
from the indian subcontinent to british colonies large indian communities are found in south africa and smaller ones are 
present in kenya tanzania and some other southern and southeast african countries the large indian community in uganda 
was expelled by the dictator idi amin in though many have since returned the islands in the indian ocean are also 
populated primarily by people of asian origin often mixed with africans and europeans the malagasy people of madagascar 
are an austronesian people but those along the coast are generally mixed with bantu arab indian and european origins 
malay and indian ancestries are also important components in the group of people known in south africa as cape coloureds 
people with origins in two or more races and continents during the th century small but economically important 
communities of lebanese and chinese have also developed in the larger coastal cities of west and east africa 
respectively languages by most estimates well over a thousand languages unesco has estimated around two thousand are 
spoken in africa most are of african origin though some are of european or asian origin africa is the most multilingual 
continent in the world and it is not rare for individuals to fluently speak not only multiple african languages but one 
or more european ones as well there are four major language families indigenous to africa the afroasiatic languages are 
a language family of about languages and million people widespread throughout the horn of africa north africa the sahel 
and southwest asia the nilosaharan language family consists of more than a hundred languages spoken by million people 
nilosaharan languages are spoken by ethnic groups in chad ethiopia kenya nigeria sudan south sudan uganda and northern 
tanzania the nigercongo language family covers much of subsaharan africa and is probably the largest language family in 
the world in terms of different languages the khoisan languages number about fifty and are spoken in southern africa by 
approximately people many of the khoisan languages are endangered the khoi and san peoples are considered the original 
inhabitants of this part of africa following the end of colonialism nearly all african countries adopted official 
languages that originated outside the continent although several countries also granted legal recognition to indigenous 
languages such as swahili yoruba igbo and hausa in numerous countries english and french see african french are used for 
communication in the public sphere such as government commerce education and the media arabic portuguese afrikaans and 
spanish are examples of languages that trace their origin to outside of africa and that are used by millions of africans 
today both in the public and private spheres italian is spoken by some in former italian colonies in africa german is 
spoken in namibia as it was a former german protectorate culture some aspects of traditional african cultures have 
become less practiced in recent years as a result of years of neglect and suppression by colonial and postcolonial 
regimes there is now a resurgence in the attempts to rediscover and revalue african traditional cultures under such 
movements as the african renaissance led by thabo mbeki afrocentrism led by a group of scholars including molefi asante 
as well as the increasing recognition of traditional spiritualism through decriminalization of vodou and other forms of 
spirituality visual art and architecture african art and architecture reflect the diversity of african cultures the 
oldest existing examples of art from africa are yearold beads made from nassarius shells that were found in the aterian 
levels at grotte des pigeons taforalt morocco the great pyramid of giza in egypt was the worlds tallest structure for 
years until the completion of lincoln cathedral around the year the stone ruins of great zimbabwe are also noteworthy 
for their architecture and the complexity of monolithic churches at lalibela ethiopia of which the church of saint 
george is representative music and dance egypt has long been a cultural focus of the arab world while remembrance of the 
rhythms of subsaharan africa in particular west africa was transmitted through the atlantic slave trade to modern samba 
blues jazz reggae hip hop and rock the s through the s saw a conglomeration of these various styles with the 
popularization of afrobeat and highlife music modern music of the continent includes the highly complex choral singing 
of southern africa and the dance rhythms of the musical genre of soukous dominated by the music of the democratic 
republic of congo indigenous musical and dance traditions of africa are maintained by oral traditions and they are 
distinct from the music and dance styles of north africa and southern africa arab influences are visible in north 
african music and dance and in southern africa western influences are apparent due to colonization sports fiftythree 
african countries have football soccer teams in the confederation of african football while cameroon nigeria senegal 
ghana and algeria have advanced to the knockout stage of recent fifa world cups south africa hosted the world cup 
tournament becoming the first african country to do so egypt has won the african cup seven times and a recordmaking 
three times in a row cricket is popular in some african nations south africa and zimbabwe have test status while kenya 
is the leading nontest team and previously had oneday international cricket odi status from october until january the 
three countries jointly hosted the cricket world cup namibia is the other african country to have played in a world cup 
morocco in northern africa has also hosted the morocco cup but the national team has never qualified for a major 
tournament rugby is a popular sport in south africa and namibia religion africans profess a wide variety of religious 
beliefs and statistics on religious affiliation are difficult to come by since they are often a sensitive a topic for 
governments with mixed religious populations according to the world book encyclopedia islam is the largest religion in 
africa followed by christianity according to encyclopdia britannica of the population are christians are muslims and 
follow traditional religions a small number of africans are hindu buddhist confucianist bahai or have beliefs from the 
judaic tradition there is also a minority of africans who are irreligious territories and regions the countries in this 
table are categorized according to the scheme for geographic subregions used by the united nations and data included are 
per sources in crossreferenced articles where they differ provisos are clearly indicated see also african union outline 
of africa index of africarelated articles afroeurasia highest mountain peaks of africa list of african millionaires list 
of cities in africa urbanization in africa references further reading asante molefi the history of africa usa routledge 
isbn clark j desmond the prehistory of africa london thames and hudson isbn crowder michael the story of nigeria london 
faber isbn davidson basil the african past chronicles from antiquity to modern times harmondsworth penguin oclc gordon 
april a donald l gordon understanding contemporary africa boulder lynne rienner publishers isbn khapoya vincent b the 
african experience an introduction upper saddle river nj prentice hall isbn moore clark d and ann dunbar africa 
yesterday and today in series the george school readings on developing lands new york praeger publishers naipaul v s the 
masque of africa glimpses of african belief picador isbn beseny jnos western sahara free online pdf book publikon 
publishers pcs isbn wade lizzie drones and satellites spot lost civilizations in unlikely places science american 
association for the advancement of science doi scienceaaa external links general information africa at dmoz african 
middle eastern reading room from the united states library of congress africa south of the sahara from stanford 
university the index on africa from the norwegian council for africa aluka digital library of scholarly resources from 
and about africa africa interactive map from the united states army africa history african kingdoms the story of africa 
from bbc world service africa policy information center apic news media allafricacom current news events and statistics 
focus on africa magazine from bbc world service