
ailurophobia is a type of specific phobia the persistent irrational fear of cats the name comes from the greek alouros 
cat and phbos fear other names include felinophobia elurophobia and cat phobia description the phobia manifests itself 
in different ways for most people it is less about fear than about loathing similar to the reaction many people have to 
snakes or rats some people experience it almost all the time others just in response to direct stimuli some possible 
situations that can trigger the loathing of cats are hearing purring seeing a cat in real life imagining the possibility 
of a cat touching or rubbing against one the thought of meeting a cat in the dark seeing the staring eyes of a cat cats 
have the tendency to stare at passerbys cats in pictures and on television and catlike toys and catlike fur treatment 
there are many ways to treat ailurophobia treatment is usually carried out by a psychiatrist or other therapy specialist 
one strongly motivated patient was able to recover by slowly becoming accustomed to cat fur by first touching varying 
types of velvet then becoming accustomed to a toy kitten and finally a live kitten which the patient subsequently 
adopted in popular culture the character of ranma saotome from the mangaanime series ranma suffers from a severe case of 
ailurophobia due to a martial arts training exercise he was forced to endure in his youth the character of dr vitus 
werdegast bela lugosi in the universal studios horror film the black cat suffers from an extreme form of ailurophobia on 
the show my extreme animal phobia a woman has a case of ailurophobia in that she believes that cats are evil 
shapeshifters tetsuya niwa a character from the manga gakuen heaven is shown to have a fear of cats gilbert nightray 
from the mangaanime pandora hearts is afraid of cats alan from the mangaanime mr has a fear of cats in a charlie brown 
christmas lucy van pelt suggests to charlie brown that he might have a fear of cats although she incorrectly refers to 
it as ailurophasia nate wright in the book and comic strip big nate written by lincon pierce he has big problems with 
his phobia because his best friend has a cat for a pet often he encounters them during soccer and baseball a character 
of the video game fuse dalton brooks is afraid of cats a character in the video game the elder scrolls iv the shivering 
isles ushnar groshadborgob is so afraid of cats that he will ask for the hero to kill a khajiit feline humanoid bhisha 
the character mio isurugi from the animemanga mm is shown to have a fear of cats that causes her to freeze up and 
tremble at the sight of them yakuza member m from the manga whats michael by makoto kobayashi has a crippling case of 
ailurophobia in episode of the anime series my bride is a mermaid it was revealed many of the merpeople are ailurphobic 
due to the fact that cats eat fish one of them however masa got over his fear of cats when he was young the character 
sasami sasasegawa from the visual novel little busters by key has ailurophobia due to the disappearance of her own cat 
during her childhood see also list of phobias references further reading crawford nelson antrim cats holy and profane 
psychoanalytic review retrieved april 