the ainu or the aynu ainu aynu japanese ainu russian ajny and in historical japanese texts ezoemishiebisu or aino are an 
indigenous people of japan hokkaido and formerly northeastern honshu and russia sakhalin and the kuril islands 
historically they spoke ainu and related varieties though today very few can do so most of those who identify themselves 
as ainu still live in this same region though the exact number of living ainu is unknown this is due to confusion over 
mixed heritages and to ethnic issues in japan resulting in those with ainu backgrounds hiding their identities 
intermarriage with japanese has blurred the concept of a pure ainu ethnic group official estimates of the population are 
of around whilst unofficially it is more than people history premodern recent research suggests that ainu culture 
originated in a merger of the okhotsk and satsumon cultures in ainu invaded the land of nivkh people controlled by the 
yuan dynasty of china that resulted in battles between ainu and the chinese active contact between the wajin the 
ethnically japanese and the ainu of ezochi now known as hokkaido began in the th century the ainu formed a society of 
huntergatherers living mainly by hunting and fishing and the people followed a religion based on phenomena of nature 
during the muromachi period the disputes between japanese and ainu eventually developed into a war takeda nobuhiro 
killed the ainu leader koshamain many ainu were subject to japanese rule which led to violent ainu revolt such as the 
koshamains revolt in against japanese influence and control on the island during the tokugawa period the ainu became 
increasingly involved in trade with japanese who controlled the southern portion of the island that is now called 
hokkaido the bakufu government granted the matsumae clan exclusive rights to trade with the ainu in the northern part of 
the island later the matsumae began to lease out tradingrights to japanese merchants and contact between japanese and 
ainu became more extensive throughout this period ainu became increasingly dependent on goods imported by japanese and 
suffered from epidemic diseases such as smallpox although the increased contact brought by trade between the japanese 
and the ainu contributed to increased mutual understanding sometimes it led to conflict occasionally intensifying into 
violent ainu revolts of which the most important was shakushains revolt an ainu rebellion against japanese authority 
ainu population dropped significantly during these years of matsumae and shogunate rule in officials estimated the total 
population of hokkaido ainu at observations made by matsuura takeshiro for example illustrate concretely the dramatic 
decline of ainu populations caused by epidemic diseases years later that number was reduced to a decline the ainu in the 
th century were much more populous before invasions from the japanese some ainu oral stories and the matsumae clans 
documents recall and record several severe battles between the ainu people and the invaders after losing several battles 
the ainu people were enslaved meiji restoration and later in there were about ainu in hokkaido in sakhalin and around in 
the kurile islands the ainu were classified as imperial subjects whose decreasing numbers distinguished them in public 
discourse as a dying race from approximately in the early eighteenth century the ainu population had decreased to by 
accounting for percent of the total population in hokkaido by they constituted only percent of hokkaidos population even 
though the actual number of ainu now heavily intermarried with japanese remained about the same metropolitan magazine 
reported many ainu were forced to work essentially as slaves for wajin ethnic japanese resulting in the breakup of 
families and the introduction of smallpox measles cholera and tuberculosis into their community in the new meiji 
government renamed ezo as hokkaido and unilaterally incorporated it into japan it banned the ainu language took ainu 
land away and prohibited salmon fishing and deer hunting they were regarded as extremely inferior races as one diet 
member had expressed it in hokkaido utari kyokai the beginning of the meiji restoration in proved a turning point for 
ainu culture the japanese government introduced a variety of social political and economic reforms in hope of 
modernising the country in the western style one innovation involved the annexation of hokkaido sjberg quotes babas 
account of the japanese governments reasoning the development of japans large northern island had several objectives 
first it was seen as a means to defend japan from a rapidly developing and expansionist russia second it offered a 
solution to the unemployment for the former samurai class finally development promised to yield the needed natural 
resources for a growing capitalist economy in the japanese government passed an act labeling the ainu as former 
aborigines with the idea they would assimilatethis resulted in the japanese government taking the land where the ainu 
people lived and placing it from then on under japanese control also at this time the ainu were granted automatic 
japanese citizenship effectively denying them the status of an indigenous group the ainu were becoming increasingly 
marginalized on their own landover a period of only years the ainu went from being a relatively isolated group of people 
to having their land language religion and customs assimilated into those of the japanese in addition to this the land 
the ainu lived on was distributed to the wajin who had decided to move to hokkaido who had been encouraged by the 
japanese government of the meiji era to take advantage of the islands abundance of natural resources and to create and 
maintain farms in the model of western industrial agriculture while at the time the process was openly referred to as 
colonization takushoku the notion was later reframed by japanese elites to the currently common usage kaitaku which 
instead conveys a sense of opening up or reclamation of the ainu lands as well as this factories such as flour mills and 
beer breweries and mining practices resulted in the creation of infrastructure such as roads and railway lines during a 
development period that lasted until during this time the ainu were forced to learn japanese required to adopt japanese 
names and ordered to cease religious practices such as animal sacrifice and the custom of tattooing the act mentioned 
above was replaced in until then the government had stated there were no ethnic minority groups it was not until june 
that japan formally recognised the ainu as an indigenous group see official recognition below intermarriages between 
japanese and ainu were actively promoted by the ainu to lessen the chances of discrimination against their offspring as 
a result many ainu are indistinguishable from their japanese neighbors but some ainujapanese are interested in 
traditional ainu culture for example oki born as a child of an ainu father and a japanese mother became a musician who 
plays the traditional ainu instrument tonkori there are also many small towns in the southeastern or hidaka region where 
ethnic ainu live such as in nibutani ainu niputay many live in sambutsu especially on the eastern coast in the number of 
pure ainu was about honna tajima and minamoto their most widely known ethnonym is derived from the word ainu which means 
human particularly as opposed to kamui divine beings basically neither ethnicity nor the name of a race in the hokkaido 
dialects of the ainu language emishi ebisu and ezo endzo yezo both are japanese terms which are believed to derive from 
another word for human which otherwise survived in sakhalin ainu as enciw or enju today many ainu dislike the term ainu 
because it had once been used with derogatory nuance and prefer to identify themselves as utari comrade in the ainu 
language official documents use both names official recognition in japan on june the japanese diet passed a bipartisan 
nonbinding resolution calling upon the government to recognize the ainu people as indigenous to japan and urging an end 
to discrimination against the group the resolution recognised the ainu people as an indigenous people with a distinct 
language religion and culture the government immediately followed with a statement acknowledging its recognition stating 
the government would like to solemnly accept the historical fact that many ainu were discriminated against and forced 
into poverty with the advancement of modernization despite being legally equal to japanese people official recognition 
in russia as a result of the treaty of saint petersburg the kuril islands were handed over to japan along with its ainu 
subjects a total of north kuril ainu arrived in petropavlovskkamchatsky on september after they decided to remain under 
russian rule they refused the offer by russian officials to move to new reservations in the commander islands finally a 
deal was reached in and the ainu decided to settle in the village of yavin in march the group left petropavlovsk and 
started the journey towards yavin by foot four months later they arrived at their new homes another village golygino was 
founded later under soviet rule both the villages were forced to disband and residents were moved to the russian 
dominated zaporozhye rural settlement in ustbolsheretsky raion as a result of intermarriage the three ethnic groups 
assimilated to form the kamchadal community in k omelchenko the minister for the protection of military and state 
secrets in ussr banned the press from publishing any more information on the ainu living in the ussr this order was 
revoked after two decades the north kuril ainu of zaporozhye are currently the largest ainu subgroup in russia the 
nakamura clan south kuril ainu on their paternal side are the smallest and numbers just people residing in petropavlovsk 
on sakhalin island there are a few dozen people who identify themselves as sakhalin ainu but many more with partial ainu 
ancestry do not acknowledge it most of the japanese people living in russia census are of mixed japaneseainu ancestry 
although they do not acknowledge it full japanese ancestry gives them the right of visafree entry to japan similarly no 
one identifies themselves as amur valley ainu although people with partial descent can be found in khabarovsk it is 
believed that there are no remaining living descendants of the kamchatka ainu in the census of russia close to people 
tried to register themselves as ethnic ainu in the village but the governing council of kamchatka krai rejected their 
claim and enrolled them as ethnic kamchadal in the leader of the ainu community in kamchatka alexei vladimirovich 
nakamura requested that vladimir ilyukhin governor of kamchatka and boris nevzorov chairman of state duma include the 
ainu in the central list of the indigenous smallnumbered peoples of the north siberia and the far east this request was 
also turned down ethnic ainu living in sakhalin oblast and khabarovsk krai are not organized politically according to 
alexei nakamura as of there are only ainu living in russia up from just people who selfidentified as ainu in and they 
along with the kurile kamchadals itelmen of kuril islands are fighting for official recognition since the ainu are not 
recognized in the official list of the peoples living in russia they are counted as people without nationality or as 
ethnic russian or kamchadal in the small ainu community living in kamchatka krai wrote a letter to vladimir putin urging 
him to reconsider any move to award the southern kuril islands to japan they also urged him to recognize the japanese 
genocide against the ainu people which putin declined as of both the kurile ainu and kurile kamchadal ethnic groups lack 
the fishing and hunting rights which the russian government grants to the indigenous tribal communities of the far north 
origins the ainu have often been considered to descend from the jmonjin people who lived in japan from the jmon period 
one of their yukar upopo or legends tells that the ainu lived in this place a hundred thousand years before the children 
of the sun came recent research suggests that the historical ainu culture originated in a merger of the okhotsk culture 
with the satsumon one of the ancient archaeological cultures that are considered to have derived from the jmon period 
cultures of the japanese archipelago their economy was based on farming as well as hunting fishing and gathering 
fullblooded ainu compared to people of yamato descent often have lighter skin and more body hair many early 
investigators proposed a caucasian ancestry although recent dna tests have not shown any genetic similarity with modern 
europeans cavallisforza places the ainu in his northeast and east asian genetic cluster anthropologist joseph powell of 
the university of new mexico said that the ainu descend from the jmon people who are an east asian population with 
closest biological affinity with southeast asians rather than western eurasian peoples mark j hudson professor of 
anthropology at nishikyushu university kanzaki saga japan said japan was settled by a protomongoloid population in the 
pleistocene who became the jmon and their features can be seen in the ainu and okinawan people margaret sleeboomfaulkner 
of the department of anthropology at the university of sussex said kanz umehara considered the ainu and ryukyuans to 
have preserved their protomongoloid traits in anthropologist arnold henry savage landor described the ainu as having 
deepset eyes and an eye shape typical of europeans with a large and prominent browridge large ears hairy and prone to 
baldness slightly flattened hook nose with large and broad nostrils prominent cheek bones large mouth and thick lips and 
a long region from nose to mouth and small chin region omoto has also shown that the ainu are mongoloid and not 
caucasoid on the basis of fingerprints and dental morphology turner found remains of jmon people of japan to belong to 
sundadont pattern similar with the southern mongoloid living populations of taiwanese aborigines filipinos indonesians 
thais borneans laotians and malaysians ainu men have abundant wavy hair and often have long beards the book of ainu life 
and legends by author kysuke kindaichi published by the japanese tourist board in contains the physical description of 
ainu many have wavy hair but some straight black hair very few of them have wavy brownish hair their skins are generally 
reported to be light brown but this is due to the fact that they labor on the sea and in briny winds all day old people 
who have long desisted from their outdoor work are often found to be as white as western men the ainu have broad faces 
beetling eyebrows and large sunken eyes which are generally horizontal and of the socalled european type eyes of the 
mongolian type are hardly found among them genetic testing has shown them to belong mainly to yhaplogroup dm ydna 
haplogroup d is found frequently throughout the japanese archipelago including okinawa the only places outside of japan 
in which yhaplogroup d is common are tibet and the andaman islands in the indian ocean in a study by tajima et al two 
out of a sample of sixteen or ainu men have been found to belong to haplogroup cm which is the most common ychromosome 
haplogroup among the indigenous populations of siberia and mongolia hammer et al have tested a sample of four ainu men 
and have found that one of them belongs to haplogroup cm some researchers have speculated that this minority of 
haplogroup cm carriers among the ainu may reflect a certain degree of unidirectional genetic influence from the nivkhs a 
traditionally nomadic people of northern sakhalin and the adjacent mainland with whom the ainu have longstanding 
cultural interactions based on analysis of one sample of modern ainus their mtdna lineages have been reported to consist 
mainly of haplogroup y according to tanaka et al or according to adachi et al who have cited tajima et al haplogroup d 
particularly dxd haplogroup ma and haplogroup g other mtdna haplogroups detected in this sample include a mb nb bf fb 
and ma most of the remaining individuals in this sample have been classified definitively only as belonging to 
macrohaplogroup m according to sato et al who have studied the mtdna of the same sample of modern ainus n the major 
haplogroups of the ainu are n including y and nxy d including dxd and d m and g including g and g the minor haplogroups 
are a b f and mxm m cz d g studies published in and show the combined frequency of ma and nb which are believed by some 
to be jomon maternal markers to be at least in okinawans ma maxma nb in ainus maxma nb and maxma ma nb to ma maxma in 
mainstream japanese a recent reevaluation of cranial traits suggests that the ainu resemble the okhotsk more than they 
do the jmon this agrees with the reference to the ainu being a merger of okhotsk and satsumon referenced above geography 
the ainu were distributed in the northern and central islands of japan from sakhalin island in the north to the kuril 
islands and the island of hokkaido and northern honsh although some investigators place their former range as throughout 
honsh and as far north as the southern tip of the kamchatka peninsula in what is now cape lopatka the island of hokkaido 
was known to the ainu as ainu moshir and was formally annexed by the japanese at the late date of partly as a means of 
preventing the intrusion of the russians and partly for imperialist reasons according to the russian empire census of 
persons in the russian empire reported ainu language as their mother tongue of them in sakhalin island the southern half 
of sakhalin was acquired by japan as a result of the russojapanese war of but at the end of world war ii in the soviets 
declared war on japan and took possession of the kuril islands and southern sakhalin the ainu population as previously 
japanese subjects were repatriated to japan during tsarist times the ainu living in russia were forbidden from 
identifying themselves as such since imperial japanese officials claimed that all the regions inhabited by the ainu in 
the past or present belonged to japan the terms kurile kamchatka kurile etc were used to identify the ethnic group 
during soviet times people with ainu surnames were sent to gulags and labor camps as they were often mistaken for 
japanese as a result large numbers of ainu changed their surnames to slavic ones after world war ii most of the ainu 
living in sakhalin were deported to japan of the ainu only around remained in russia of those who remained only the 
elderly were fullblooded ainu others were either mixed race or married to ethnic russians the last of the ainu 
households disappeared in the late s when yamanaka kitaro committed suicide after the death of his wife the couple was 
childless to eradicate ainu identity soviet authorities removed the ethnic group from the list of nationalities which 
could be mentioned in a soviet passport due to this children born after were not able to identify themselves as ainu the 
last known deportation of ainu to japan occurred in when keizo nakamura a full blooded northern kuril ainu was deported 
to hokkaido after serving years hard labor in the province of magadan his wife tamara timofeevna pikhteevoi was of mixed 
sakhalin ainu and gilyak ancestry after the arrest of keizo in tamara and her son alexei nakamura were expelled from 
kamchatka krai and sent to the island of sakhalin to live in the city of tomari unlike the other ainu clans currently 
living in russia there is considerable doubt whether the nakamura clan of kamchatka should be identified as northern 
kuril ainu southern kuril ainu or as kamchatka ainu this is due to the fact that the clan originally immigrated to 
kamchatka from kunashir in the ainu of kunashir are south kuril ainu they settled down near kurile lake which was 
inhabited by the kamchatka ainu and north kuril ainu in the ainu of kurile lake fled to the island of paramushir after 
an armed conflict with the soviet authorities at that time paramushir was under japanese rule during the invasion of the 
kuril islands akira nakamura b was captured by the soviet army and his elder son takeshi nakamura was killed in the 
battle akiras only surviving son keizo b was taken prisoner and joined the soviet army after his capture after the war 
keizo went to korsakov to work in the local harbor in he married tamara pikhtivoi a member of the sakhalin ainu tribe 
their only child alexei was born in the descendants of tamara and alexei are found in kamchatka and sakhalin in the ussr 
removed the term ainu from the list of living ethnic groups of russia an act by which the government proclaimed that the 
ainu as an ethnic group were extinct in its territory according to the russian federation census no responders gave the 
ethnonym ainu in boxes or in the k form of the census though some still might exist during the census of russia the 
authorities rejected the claim from a group of mostly mixed race ainu living in kamchatka that they were not extinct the 
only ainu speakers remaining besides perhaps a few partial speakers live solely in japan there they are concentrated 
primarily on the southern and eastern coasts of the island of hokkaido due to intermarriage with the japanese and 
ongoing absorption into the predominant culture there are no truly ainu settlements existing in japan today the town of 
nibutani ainu niputay in hidaka area hokkaido prefecture has a number of ainu households and a visit to some of the ainu 
owned craft shops close to the ainu museums there are two of them in nibutani is an opportunity to interact with the 
ainu people many authentic ainu villages advertised in hokkaido such as akan and shiraoi are tourist attractions and 
provide an opportunity to see and meet ainu people language today it is estimated that fewer than speakers of the 
language remain while other research places the number at fewer than speakers the language has been classified as 
endangered as a result of this the study of the ainu language is limited and is based largely on historical research 
although there have been attempts to show that the ainu language and the japanese language are related modern scholars 
have rejected that the relationship goes beyond contact such as the mutual borrowing of words between japanese and ainu 
in fact no attempt to show a relationship with ainu to any other language has gained wide acceptance and ainu is 
currently considered to be a language isolate words used as prepositions in english such as to from by in and at are 
postpositional in ainu they come after the word that they modify a single sentence in ainu can be made up of many added 
or agglutinated sounds or affixes that represent nouns or ideas the ainu language has had no system of writing and has 
historically been transliterated by the japanese kana or russian cyrillic today it is typically written in either 
katakana or latin alphabet the unwieldy nature of the japanese kana with its inability to accurately represent coda 
consonants has contributed to the degradation of the original ainu for example some words such as kor meaning to hold 
are now pronounced with a terminal vowel sound as in koro many of the ainu dialects even from one end of hokkaido to the 
other were not mutually intelligible however the classic ainu language of the yukar or ainu epic stories was understood 
by all without a writing system the ainu were masters of narration with the yukar and other forms of narration such as 
the uepeker uwepeker tales being committed to memory and related at gatherings often lasting many hours or even days 
culture traditional ainu culture was quite different from japanese culture never shaving after a certain age the men had 
full beards and moustaches men and women alike cut their hair level with the shoulders at the sides of the head trimmed 
semicircularly behind the women tattooed their mouths and sometimes the forearms the mouth tattoos were started at a 
young age with a small spot on the upper lip gradually increasing with size the soot deposited on a pot hung over a fire 
of birch bark was used for color their traditional dress was a robe spun from the inner bark of the elm tree called 
attusi or attush various styles were made and consisted generally of a simple short robe with straight sleeves which was 
folded around the body and tied with a band about the waist the sleeves ended at the wrist or forearm and the length 
generally was to the calves women also wore an undergarment of japanese cloth modern craftswomen weave and embroider 
traditional garments that command very high prices in winter the skins of animals were worn with leggings of deerskin 
and in sakhalin boots were made from the skin of dogs or salmon both sexes are fond of earrings which are said to have 
been made of grapevine in former times as also are bead necklaces called tamasay which the women prized highly their 
traditional cuisine consists of the flesh of bear fox wolf badger ox or horse as well as fish fowl millet vegetables 
herbs and roots they never ate raw fish or flesh it was always boiled or roasted their traditional habitations were 
reedthatched huts the largest ft m square without partitions and having a fireplace in the center there was no chimney 
only a hole at the angle of the roof there was one window on the eastern side and there were two doors the house of the 
village head was used as a public meeting place when one was needed instead of using furniture they sat on the floor 
which was covered with two layers of mats one of rush the other of a water plant with long sword shaped leaves iris 
pseudacorus whose english names include waterflag and for beds they spread planks hanging mats around them on poles and 
employing skins for coverlets the men used chopsticks when eating the women had wooden spoons ainu cuisine is not 
commonly eaten outside ainu communities there are only a few ainurun restaurants in japan all located in tokyo or 
hokkaido serving primarily japanese fare the functions of judgeship were not entrusted to chiefs an indefinite number of 
a communitys members sat in judgment upon its criminals capital punishment did not exist nor did the community resort to 
imprisonment beating was considered a sufficient and final penalty however in the case of murder the nose and ears of 
the culprit were cut off or the tendons of his feet severed hunting the ainu hunted from late autumn to early summer the 
reasons for this were among others that in late autumn plant gathering salmon fishing and other activities of securing 
food came to an end and hunters readily found game in fields and mountains in which plants had withered a village 
possessed a hunting ground of its own or several villages used a joint hunting territory iwor heavy penalties were 
imposed on any outsiders trespassing on such hunting grounds or joint hunting territory the ainu hunted bear ezo deer a 
subspecies of sika deer rabbit fox raccoon dog and other animals ezo deer were a particularly important food resource 
for the ainu as were salmon they also hunted sea eagles such as whitetailed sea eagles raven and other birds the ainu 
hunted eagles to obtain their tail feathers which they used in trade with the japanese the ainu hunted with arrows and 
spears with poisoncoated points they obtained the poison called surku from the roots and stalks of aconites the recipe 
for this poison was a household secret that differed from family to family they enhanced the poison with mixtures of 
roots and stalks of dogs bane boiled juice of mekuragumo matsumomushi tobacco and other ingredients they also used 
stingray stingers or skin covering stingers they hunted in groups with dogs before the ainu went hunting for animals 
like bear in particular they prayed to the god of fire and the house guardian god to convey their wishes for a large 
catch and safe hunting to the god of mountains the ainu usually hunted bear during the time of the spring thaw at that 
time bears were weak because they had not fed at all during long hibernation ainu hunters caught hibernating bears or 
bears that had just left hibernation dens when they hunted bear in summer they used a spring trap loaded with an arrow 
called an amappo the ainu usually used arrows to hunt deer also they often used traps including spring traps loaded with 
arrows also they drove deer into a river or sea and shot them with arrows for a large catch a whole village would drive 
a herd of deer off a cliff and club them to death religion the ainu are traditionally animists believing that everything 
in nature has a kamuy spirit or god on the inside the most important include kamuy fuchi goddess of the hearth kimun 
kamuy god of bears and mountains and repun kamuy god of the sea fishing and marine animals the ainu have no priests by 
profession instead the village chief performs whatever religious ceremonies are necessary ceremonies are confined to 
making libations of sake uttering prayers and offering willow sticks with wooden shavings attached to them these sticks 
are called inaw singular and nusa plural they are placed on an altar used to send back the spirits of killed animals 
ainu ceremonies for sending back bears are called iomante the ainu people give thanks to the gods before eating and pray 
to the deity of fire in time of sickness they believe their spirits are immortal and that their spirits will be rewarded 
hereafter by ascending to kamui mosir land of the gods the ainu are part of a larger collective of indigenous people who 
practice arctolatry or bear worship the ainu believe the bear is very special because they think the bear is kimun 
kamuys way of delivering the gift of bear hide and meat to the humans ainu assimilated into mainstream japanese society 
have adopted buddhism with shinto influences while some northern ainu are members of the russian orthodox church 
ornaments men wore a crown called sapanpe for important ceremonies sapanpe was made from wood fiber with bundles of 
partially shaved wood this crown had wooden figures of animal gods and other ornaments on its center men carried an 
emush sword secured by an emush at strap to their shoulders women wore matanpushi embroidered headbands and ninkari 
earrings ninkari was a metal ring with a ball women wore it through a hole in the ear matanpushi and ninkari were 
originally worn by men however women wear them now furthermore aprons called maidari now are a part of womens formal 
clothes however some old documents say that men wore maidari women sometimes wore a bracelet called tekunkani women wore 
a necklace called rekutunpe a long narrow strip of cloth with metal plaques they wore a necklace that reached the breast 
called a tamasay or shitoki usually made from glass balls some glass balls came from trade with the asian continent the 
ainu also obtained glass balls secretly made by the matsumae clan housing a village is called a kotan in the ainu 
language kotan were located in river basins and seashores where food was readily available particularly in the basins of 
rivers through which salmon went upstream a village consisted basically of a paternal clan the average number of 
families was four to seven rarely reaching more than ten in the early modern times the ainu people were forced to labor 
at the fishing grounds of the japanese ainu kotan were also forced to move near fishing grounds so that the japanese 
could secure a labor force when the japanese moved to other fishing grounds ainu kotan were also forced to accompany 
them as a result the traditional kotan disappeared and large villages of several dozen families were formed around the 
fishing grounds cise or cisey houses in a kotan were made of cogon grasses bamboo grass barks etc the length lay east to 
west or parallel to a river a house was about seven meters by five with an entrance at the west end that also served as 
a storeroom the house had three windows including the rorunpuyar a window located on the side facing the entrance at the 
east side through which gods entered and left and ceremonial tools were taken in and out the ainu have regarded this 
window as sacred and have been told never to look in through it a house had a fireplace near the entrance the husband 
and wife sat on the fireplaces left side called shiso children and guests sat facing them on the fireplaces right side 
called harkiso the house had a platform for valuables called iyoykir behind the shiso the ainu placed shintoko hokai and 
ikayop quivers there outbuildings included separate lavatories for men called ashinru and for women called menokoru a pu 
storehouse for food a heper set cage for young bear and dryingracks for fish and wild plants an altar nusasan faced the 
east side of the house rorunpuyar the ainu held such ceremonies there as iyomante a ceremony to send the spirit of a 
bear to the gods life of ainu the ainu people had various types of marriage a child was promised in marriage by 
arrangement between his or her parents and the parents of his or her betrothed or by a gobetween when the betrothed 
reached a marriageable age they were told who their spouse was to be there were also marriages based on mutual consent 
of both sexes in some areas when a daughter reached a marriageable age her parents let her live in a small room called 
tunpu annexed to the southern wall of her house the parents chose her spouse from men who visited her the age of 
marriage was to years of age for men and to years of age for women who were tattooed at these ages both sexes were 
regarded as adults when a man proposed to a woman he visited her house ate half a full bowl of rice handed to him by her 
and returned the rest to her if the woman ate the rest she accepted his proposal if she did not and put it beside her 
she rejected his proposal when a man became engaged to a woman or they learned that their engagement had been arranged 
they exchanged gifts with each other he sent her a small engraved knife a workbox a spool and other gifts she sent him 
embroidered clothes coverings for the back of the hand ieggings and other handmade clothes according to some books many 
yomeiri marriages in which a bride went to the house of a bridegroom with her belongings to become a member of his 
family were conducted in the old days for a yomeiri marriage a man and his father would bring betrothal gifts to the 
house of a woman including a sword a treasured sword an ornamental quiver a sword guard and a woven basket hokai if the 
man and woman agreed to marry the man and his father would bring her to their house or the man would stay at her house 
for a while and then bring her to his house at the wedding ceremony participants prayed to the god of fire bride and 
bridegroom respectively ate half of the rice served in a bowl and other participants were entertained the wornout fabric 
of old clothing was used for baby clothes because soft cloth was good for the skin of babies and wornout material 
protected babies from gods of illness and demons due to these gods abhorrence of dirty things before a baby was 
breastfed heshe was given a decoction of the endodermis of alder and the roots of butterburs to discharge impurities 
children were raised almost naked until about the ages of four to five even when they wore clothes they did not wear 
belts and left the front of their clothes open subsequently they wore bark clothes without patterns such as attush until 
coming of age newborn babies were named ayay a babys crying shipo poyshi small excrement shion old excrement etc 
children were called by these temporary names until the ages of two to three they were not given permanent names when 
they were born their tentative names had a portion meaning excrement or old things to ward off the demon of illhealth 
some children were named based on their behavior or habits other children were named after impressive events or after 
parents wishes for the future of the children when children were named they were never given the same names as others 
men wore loincloths and had their hair dressed properly for the first time at age women were also considered adults at 
the age of they wore underclothes called mour and had their hair dressed properly and wound waistcloths called raunkut 
ponkut etc around their bodies when women reached age the lips hands and arms were tattooed when they reached age their 
tattoos were completed thus were they qualified for marriage institutions most hokkaido ainu and some other ainu are 
members of an umbrella group called the hokkaido utari association it was originally controlled by the government to 
speed ainu assimilation and integration into the japanese nationstate it now is run exclusively by ainu and operates 
mostly independently of the government other key institutions include the foundation for research and promotion of ainu 
culture frpac set up by the japanese government after enactment of the ainu culture law in the hokkaido university 
center for ainu and indigenous studies established in as well as museums and cultural centers ainu people living in 
tokyo have also developed a vibrant political and cultural community current affairs litigation on march the sapporo 
district court decided a landmark case that for the first time in japanese history recognized the right of the ainu 
people to enjoy their distinct culture and traditions the case arose because of a government plan to build two dams in 
the saru river watershed in southern hokkaido the dams were part of a series of development projects under the second 
national development plan that were intended to industrialize the north of japan the planned location for one of the 
dams was across the valley floor close to nibutani village the home of a large community of ainu people and an important 
center of ainu culture and history in the early s when the government commenced construction on the dam two ainu 
landowners refused to agree to the expropriation of their land these landowners were kaizawa tadashi and kayano 
shigeruwellknown and important leaders in the ainu community after kaizawa and kayano declined to sell their land the 
hokkaido development bureau applied for and was subsequently granted a project authorization which required the men to 
vacate their land when their appeal of the authorization was denied kayano and kaizawas son koichii kaizawa died in 
filed suit against the hokkaido development bureau the final decision denied the relief sought by the plaintiffs for 
pragmatic reasonsthe dam was already standingbut the decision was nonetheless heralded as a landmark victory for the 
ainu people in short nearly all of the plaintiffs claims were recognized moreover the decision marked the first time 
japanese case law acknowledged the ainu as an indigenous people and contemplated the responsibility of the japanese 
nation to the indigenous people within its borders the decision included broad factfinding that underscored the long 
history of the oppression of the ainu people by japans majority referred to as wajin in the case and discussions about 
the case the legal roots of the decision can be found in article of japans constitution which protects the rights of the 
individual and in the international covenant on civil and political rights the decision was issued on march and because 
of the broad implications for ainu rights the plaintiffs decided not to appeal the decision which became final two weeks 
later after the decision was issued on may the diet passed the ainu culture law and repealed the ainu protection actthe 
law that had been the vehicle of ainu oppression for almost one hundred years while the ainu culture law has been widely 
criticized for its shortcomings the shift that it represents in japans view of the ainu people is a testament to the 
importance of the nibutani decision in the cultural landscape along the sarugawa river resulting from ainu tradition and 
modern settlement was designated an important cultural landscape a later action seeking restoration of ainu assets held 
in trust by the japanese government was dismissed in governmental advisory boards much national policy in japan has been 
developed out of the action of governmental advisory boards known as shingikai in japanese one such committee operated 
in the late s and its work resulted in the ainu culture law this panels circumstances were criticized for including not 
even a single ainu person among its members more recently a panel was established in which notably was the first time an 
ainu person was included it completed its work in issuing a major report that included an extensive historical record 
and called for substantial government policy changes towards the ainu formation of ainu political party the ainu party 
ainu minzoku t was founded on january after a group of ainu activists in hokkaido announced the formation of a political 
party for the ainu on october the ainu association of hokkaido reported that kayano shiro the son of the former ainu 
leader kayano shigeru will head the party their aim is to contribute to the realization of a multicultural and 
multiethnic society in japan along with rights for the ainu subgroups hokkaido ainu the predominant community of ainu in 
the world today a japanese census in returned pureblooded ainu in addition to multiracial individuals tokyo ainu a 
modern age migration of hokkaido ainu highlighted in a documentary film released in httpwwwkamuymintaracomfilmengtophtm 
tohoku ainu from honsh no officially acknowledged population exists ainu households scattered throughout the tohoku 
region were reported during the th century there are people who consider themselves descendants of shimokita ainu on the 
shimokita peninsula while the people on the tsugaru peninsula are generally considered yamato but may be descendants of 
tsugaru ainu after cultural assimilation sakhalin ainu pureblooded individuals may be surviving in hokkaido from both 
northern and southern sakhalin a total of ainu were relocated to hokkaido in by japan only a few in remote interior 
areas remained as the island was turned over to russia even when japan was granted southern sakhalin in only a handful 
returned the japanese census of counted only sakhalin ainu down from in in karafuto and in hokkaido the soviet census of 
counted ainu while several of their multiracial children were recorded as ethnic nivkh slav or uilta north sakhalin only 
pureblooded individuals were recorded during the soviet census in northern sakhalin most of the sakhalin ainu mainly 
from coastal areas were relocated to hokkaido in by japan the few that remained mainly in the remote interior were 
mostly married to russians as can be seen from the works of bronisaw pisudski southern sakhalin karafuto japanese rule 
until japan evacuated almost all the ainu to hokkaido after world war ii isolated individuals might have remained on 
sakhalin in there were about ainu living on soviet sakhalin northern kuril ainu no known living population in japan 
existence not recognized by russian government in kamchatka krai also known as kurile in russian records were under 
russian rule until first came under japanese rule after the treaty of saint petersburg major population was on the 
island of shumshu with a few others on islands like paramushir altogether they numbered in they had russian names spoke 
russian fluently and were russian orthodox in religion as the islands were given to the japanese more than a hundred 
ainu fled to kamchatka along with their russian employers where they were assimilated into the kamchadal population only 
about half remained under japanese rule in order to derussify the kurile the entire population of individuals was 
relocated to shikotan in given japanese names and the children were enrolled in japanese schools unlike the other ainu 
groups the kurile failed to adjust to their new surroundings and by only individuals were alive plus another multiracial 
individuals the last group of individuals including a few purebloods were evacuated to hokkaido in where they vanished 
as a separate ethnic group soon after southern kuril ainu no known living population numbered almost people mainly in 
kunashir iturup and urup during the th century in their population had decreased to around individuals mostly 
multiracial who remained in were evacuated to hokkaido by the japanese soon after world war ii the last fullblooded 
southern kuril ainu was suyama nisaku who died in the last of the tribe partial ancestry tanaka kinu died on hokkaido in 
kamchatka ainu no known living population known as kamchatka kurile in russian records ceased to exist as a separate 
ethnic group after their defeat in by the russians individuals were assimilated into the kurile and kamchadal ethnic 
groups last recorded in the th century by russian explorers amur valley ainu probably none remain a few individuals 
married to ethnic russians and ethnic ulchi reported by bronisaw pisudski in the early th century only pureblooded 
individuals were recorded during the russian census in nikolaevski okrug presentday nikolaevskij regiondistrict probably 
assimilated into the slavic rural population although no one identifies as ainu nowadays in khabarovsk krai there are a 
large number of ethnic ulch with partial ainu ancestry see also ainu in russia ainuken akira ifukube bibliography of the 
ainu bronisaw pisudski constitution of japan declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples emishi aterui ethnocide 
hiram m hiller jr indigenous peoples shigeru kayano nibutani dam ainu culture yukar matagi ikupasuy ainu music ethnic 
groups in japan ethnic issues in japan human rights in japan burakumin ryukyuan people ryky independence movement nivkhs 
yamato people notes japan times ainu plan group for upper house run october references and further reading chisholm hugh 
ed ainu encyclopdia britannica th ed cambridge university press external links rare japanese video featuring ainu the 
ainu museum at shiraoi smithsonian institution hokkaido utari kyokai sapporo pirka kotan ainu cultural center institute 
for the study of languages and cultures of ainu in samani hokkaido ainunorth american cultural similarities foundation 
for research and promotion of ainu culture centers located in sapporo and tokyo hokkaido university center for ainu and 
indigenous studies ainu lineage the boone collection nibutani ainu cultural museum in japanese ainu komonjo th th 
century records ohnuki collection article in the christian science monitor june aino folktales chamberlain b h folklore 
society members edition without expurgation