
akkorokamui is a gigantic octopuslike monster from ainu folklore which supposedly lurks in funka bay in hokkaid and has 
been allegedly sighted in several locations including taiwan and korea since the th century john batchelor most notably 
records an account of this monster in his book the ainu and their folklore when noting three men it was said were out 
trying to catch a swordfish when all at once a great seamonster with large staring eyes appeared in front of them and 
proceeded to attack the boat the monster was round in shape and emitted a dark fluid which has a very powerful and 
noxious odour it is said that its enormous body can reach sizes of up to meters in length the coloration of the 
akkorokamui is said to be a striking red often described as glowing and sometimes likened to the color of the reflection 
of the setting sun upon the water due to its coloration and immense size it is visible from great distances it is 
possibly a giant squid or a giant octopus ainu reverence of this monster has permeated into shintoism which has 
incorporated akkorokamui as a minor kami self purification practices for akkorokamui are often strictly followed while 
akkorokamui is often presented as a benevolent kami with powers to heal and bestow knowledge it is fickle and has the 
propensity to do harm akkorokamuis nature as an octopus means that it is persistent and it is near impossible to escape 
its grasp without permission like other shinto purification rituals prior to entering the shrine of akkorokamui ones 
hands must be cleaned with water with the exception that ones feet must also be cleaned as well akkorokamui enjoys the 
sea and offerings which reflect this fish crab mollusks and the like are particular favorites of akkorokamui which give 
back that which it gave homage to akkorokamui is often for ailments of the limbs or skin but mental purification and 
spiritual release is particularly important shrines in dedication to akkorokamui and associated octopus deity are found 
throughout japan in particular well known shrines include one in kyoto and the island of hokkaido that pay homage to 
nade yakushi these shrines while named to different entities come from and share various characteristics with 
akkorokamui and as such practices involving healing renewal and purification are similar akkorokamui is 
characteristically described with the ability to selfamputate like several octopus species and regenerate limbs this 
characteristic manifests in the belief in shinto that akkorokamui has healing powers consequently it is believed among 
followers that giving offerings to akkorokamui will heal ailments of the body in particular disfigurements and broken 
limbs nade yakushi is housed within the takoyakushido a shrine dedicated to nade yakushi along the street teramachidori 
meaning temple town in kyoto this deity receives visits by thousands of individuals per year wishing for healing at the 
shrine nade yakushi is physically manifested as a wooden statue of an octopus worshippers believe that when the left 
hand of an individual touches the limbs of the statue the individuals ailments both mental and physical are removed see 
also cryptids kraken notes japanese japanese