
alfriston is a village and civil parish in the sussex district of wealden england the village lies in the valley of the 
river cuckmere about four miles km northeast of seaford and south of the main a trunk road and part of the large area of 
polegate the parish has a population of census history most of these notes have been adapted from the village reference 
website there is strong evidence of ancient occupation of the area since several neolithic long barrows have been 
discovered on the surrounding downs among them to the west is the fairly well preserved long burgh in saxon times the 
village was recorded as aelfrictun the town of alfric from which the domesday book records the town as elfriceshtun one 
building of historical importance is the star inn originally a religious hostel built in and used to accommodate monks 
and pilgrims en route from battle abbey to the shrine of st richard patron saint of sussex at chichester cathedral it 
became an inn in the th century wooden figures grace the upper part of the building whilst in the front is a onetime 
ships figurehead representing a red lion the latter is connected with the alfriston smuggling gang who used the inn as a 
base their leader was transported to australia in churches the alfriston parish church dedicated to st andrew has saxon 
origins although most of the building dates from the th century it is known because of its size as the cathedral of the 
south downs it sits on a small flintwalled mound in the middle of the tye the local village green overlooking the river 
cuckmere and is surrounded by the flowered graveyard it is built in the form of a cross today it is part of the united 
benefice which includes st michaels church at litlington and all saints church at west dean alfristons former united 
reformed church is included in that grouping the th century alfriston clergy house close by was originally the vicarage 
but is now maintained by the national trust it was the very first property brought by the trust in and it is a classic 
example of a wealden hall house with thatched roof and timberframed walls it also has a tranquil garden and orchard on 
the banks of the cuckmere the village of alfriston the east side of the village lies by the river cuckmere and is home 
to the village green which is called the tye in the centre of the tye is st andrews church which lies on a raised mount 
surrounded by a flint wall next to it is the alfriston clergy house a national trust property the first purchased by 
them also on the tye is the georgian unitarian chapel the wooden sign for the village at the entrance to the tye was 
carved by a previous vicar of the village who also repaired the star inns red lion the centre of the village is the 
market square which contains a market cross the village contains three pubs the star inn the smugglers inn and the 
george inn a channel archaeology programme pub dig revealed evidence of long occupation of the site of the smugglers inn 
including signs of smuggling animal butchery and neolithic activity at the rear of the building the south downs way 
crosses the river in alfriston and then continues up onto the downs there is a youth hostel outside the village on the 
road to seaford run by the youth hostels association during the week leading up to the august bank holiday weekend there 
is the alfriston festival which ends with a grand fair on the tye with the proceeds going to several local national 
charities it is attended by a large number of people from many miles around in december there is also an alfriston 
christmas weekend the village also has its own clay pigeon shooting club the alfriston cricket club has won the cuckmere 
valley league on nine occasions with the earliest being and the most recent the arts and alfriston in eleanor farjeon 
wrote the popular hymn morning has broken in alfriston the hymn is supposedly about the beauty she saw around her in 
this village the song was later recorded by cat stevens in the s reaching a wider audience the novel uneasy terms by 
international bestselling crime and thriller writer peter cheyney is set mainly in and around alfriston the private 
detective slim callaghan stays in one of the pubs in alfriston which in the novel is called the two friars whilst 
solving a murder at the nearby house dark spinney home of the alardyse family the author describes the village thus 
callaghan walked slowly through the open space at the end of alfriston high street the afternoon sun shone on the old 
houses and the tree in the middle of the little square threw a pleasant shadow several other local places are mentioned 
in the novel among them brighton eastbourne herstmonceaux pevensey bay rottingdean and polegate the book was made into a 
film in starring moira lister and michael rennie cheyney also mentions alfriston in several other of his novels 
including dance without music another wellknown thrillerwriter victor canning sets the prologue to his novel the hidden 
face us burden of proof in alfriston the hero peter barlow comes to the village to confront a resident james gurney 
hansford who has cheated his father and driven him to suicide they fight later hansford is murdered and barlow wrongly 
convicted of the crime the film the chalk garden starring sir john mills hayley mills and deborah kerr was filmed in and 
around the village peter sellers film waltz of the toreadors was also filmed here references external links alfriston in 
the domesday book