
an animal shelter or pound is a place where stray lost abandoned or surrendered animals mostly dogs and cats and 
sometimes sick or wounded wildlife are brought while nokill shelters exist it is sometimes policy to euthanize sick 
animals and any animal that is not claimed quickly enough by a previous or new owner in europe of countries included in 
a survey all but three germany greece and italy permitted the killing of healthy stray dogs critics believe the new term 
animal shelter is generally a euphemism for the older term pound the word pound had its origins in the animal pounds of 
agricultural communities where stray livestock would be penned or impounded until claimed by their owners united states 
in the united states there is no governmentrun organization that provides oversight or regulation of the various 
shelters on a national basis however many individual states do regulate shelters within their jurisdiction one of the 
earliest comprehensive measures was the georgia animal protection act of the law was enacted in response to the inhumane 
treatment of companion animals by a pet store chain in atlanta the act provided for the licensing and regulation of pet 
shops stables kennels and animal shelters and established for the first time minimum standards of care the georgia 
department of agriculture was tasked with licensing animal shelters and enforcing the new law through the departments 
newly created animal protection division an additional provision added in was the humane euthanasia act which was the 
first state law to mandate intravenous injection of sodium pentothal in place of gas chambers and other less humane 
methods the law was further expanded and strengthened with the animal protection act of currently it is estimated that 
there are approximately independently run animal shelters operating nationwide shelters have redefined their role since 
the s no longer serving as an untildeath repository for strays and dropoffs modern shelters have taken the lead in 
controlling the pet population promoting pet adoption and studying shelter animals health and behavior shelters and 
shelterlike volunteer organizations responded to cat overpopulation with trapneuterrelease programs that reduced feral 
cat populations and reduced the burden on shelters in the united states many governmentrun animal shelters operate in 
conditions that are far from ideal in the wake of the financial crisis of many government shelters have run out of 
adequate space and financial resources shelters unable to raise additional funds to provide for the increased number of 
incoming animals have no choice but to euthanize them sometimes within days in approximately four million cats and dogs 
died in us shelters canada in canada the governmentrun humane society shelters specialize in dogs cats and small rodents 
some shelters will also keep reptiles and parrots united kingdom in the united kingdom animal shelters are more commonly 
known as rescue or rehoming centers and are run by charitable organizations the most common rescue and rehoming 
organizations are the rspca cats protection and the dogs trust germany larger cities in germany either have a city 
shelter for animals or contract with one of the very common nonprofit animal organizations throughout the country which 
run their own shelters most shelters are populated by dogs cats and a variety of small animals like mice rats and 
rabbits additionally there are socalled gnadenhfe mercyfarms for larger animals they take cattle or horses from private 
owners who want to put them down for financial reasons under german law euthanasia of animals is restricted to medical 
reasons or cases where the animal is dangerous not controllable and actually poses a danger to humans gefahr im verzug 
exigent circumstance most dangerous animals such as aggressive dogs possession of some special breeds is restricted are 
locked away until rehoused to a controlled environment india across india various animal shelters are run by the 
followers of jainism the lal mandir a prominent jain temple in delhi is known for the jain birds hospital in a second 
building behind the main temple every city and town in bundelkhand has animal shelters run by jains new zealand in new 
zealand dog pounds are run by each territorial local authority who provide animal control services under the dog control 
act see also abandoned pets black dog bias cat colony dog camp goshala cow shelters in india neutering nokill shelter 
overpopulation in companion animals pet adoption shelter dogs a controversial documentary film references external links 
chesley v morton v georgia department of agriculture and tommy irvin in his official capacity as commissioner