
animal welfare science is the scientific study of the welfare of animals as pets in zoos laboratories on farms and in 
the wild although animal welfare has been of great concern for many thousands of years in religion and culture the 
investigation of animal welfare using rigorous scientific methods is a relatively recent development the worlds first 
professor of animal welfare science donald broom was appointed by cambridge university uk in historical legislation and 
guidelines early legislation which formed the impetus for assessing animal welfare and the subsequent development of 
animal welfare science include the ireland parliament thomas wentworth an act against plowing by the tayle and pulling 
the wooll off living sheep and the massachusetts colony nathaniel ward off the bruite creatures liberty and in the 
massachusetts body of liberties of richard martins act the cruel treatment of cattle act is often considered to be the 
precursor of modern relevant legislation one of the first national laws to protect animals was the uk cruelty to animals 
act followed by the protection of animals act in the us it was many years until there was a national law to protect 
animals the animal welfare act of although there were a number of states that passed anticruelty laws between and in 
india animals are protected by the prevention of cruelty to animals act in the uk the animal welfare act consolidated 
many different forms of animal welfare legislation animal welfare science can be considered as the assessment of welfare 
the first publication to include the term assessment appears to be a appendix by william thorpe entitled the assessment 
of pain and distress in animals this was followed years later by a highly influential paper on assessing pain and 
distress in laboratory animals by morton and griffiths methods of assessment animal welfare science uses a variety of 
behavioural or physiological measures or indicators integrated approaches to assess animal welfare include risk analysis 
and semantic modelling of animal welfare animal behaviour occurrence of abnormal behaviours eg stereotypies feather 
pecking tailbiting departure from ethogram of ancestral precursors behaviour of captive animals upon release in a 
natural environment preference studies motivation studies cognitive bias in animals studies self selection of 
anxiolytics effects of frustration animal physiology heart rate corticosteroids in plasma saliva urine faeces hair 
feathers and eggs immune function neuorobiology eggshell quality thermography organisations organisations interested in 
animal welfare science were set up before the subject became recognised as a science the royal society for the 
prevention of cruelty to animals rspca was founded in by a group of twentytwo reformers led by richard martin mp who 
would thereby earn the nickname humanity dick william wilberforce mp and the reverend arthur broome the universities 
federation for animal welfare ufaw history can be traced to the founding in of the university of london animal welfare 
society ulaws by major charles hume the name was changed to the universities federation for animal welfare in reflecting 
the increasingly wide range of people and institutions involved more recent organisations involved in animal welfare 
science include the scientists center for animal welfare scaw and university departments specialising in this branch of 
science including the animal welfare and anthrozoology center at cambridge university the animal welfare science centre 
at the university of melbourne in australia and the animal welfare science and bioethics centre at massey university in 
new zealand the center for animal welfare science was also recently relaunched at purdue university in the usa although 
not limited to animal welfare science many members of the international society for applied ethology work and publish 
research in this subject journals articles and books veterinary journals carrying articles on animal welfare have been 
published for many years for example the veterinary record has been published weekly since peerreviewed scientific 
journals have been launched more recently eg applied animal behaviour science in animal welfare in and the journal of 
applied animal welfare science in many books on animal welfare science have been written for example those by professor 
marian stamp dawkins professor david fraser michael appleby barry hughes and joy mench john webster and david mellor et 
al teaching in in an article on the history of animal welfare science professor donald broom wrote the numbers of animal 
welfare scientists is increasing rapidly the subject is now being taught in all european countries and the number of 
university courses on animal welfare in brazil has increased from one to over in years the diversity of animal welfare 
science is increasing and the expansion is likely to continue the decision by the american veterinary medical 
association to promote the teaching of the subject in all american veterinary schools will have a substantial effect see 
also animal welfare animal consciousness fish welfare at slaughter pain in animals references further references 
huntingford fa c adams va braithwaite s kadri tg pottinger p sande and jf turnbull review paper current issues in fish 
welfare journal of fish biology doijx