
animal euthanasia euthanasia from greek good death is the act of humanely putting an animal to death or allowing it to 
die as by withholding extreme medical measures reasons for euthanasia include incurable and especially painful 
conditions or diseases lack of resources to continue supporting the animal or laboratory test procedures euthanasia 
methods are designed to cause minimal pain and distress euthanasia is distinct from animal slaughter and pest control 
which are performed for purposes other than an act of mercy although in some cases the procedure is the same in 
domesticated animals this process is commonly referred to by euphemisms such as put down put to sleep or put out of 
hisherits misery methods the methods of anesthesia can be divided into pharmacological and physical methods acceptable 
pharmacological methods include injected drugs and gases that first depress the central nervous system and then 
cardiovascular activity acceptable physical methods must first cause rapid loss of consciousness by disrupting the 
central nervous system the most common methods are discussed here but there are other acceptable methods used in 
different situations intravenous anesthetic pets are almost always euthanized by intravenous injection typically using a 
very high dose of pentobarbital or sodium thiopental unconsciousness respiratory then cardiac arrest follow rapidly 
usually within seconds observers generally describe the method as leading to a quick and peaceful death for companion 
animals euthanized in animal shelters states in the us now prescribe intravenous injection as the required method these 
laws date to when georgias humane euthanasia act became the first state law to mandate this method before that gas 
chambers and other means were commonly employed the georgia law was resisted by the georgia of agriculture
tommy irvin who was charged with enforcing the act in march he was sued by former state representative chesley v morton 
who wrote the law and subsequently ordered by the court to enforce all provisions of the act some veterinarians perform 
a twostage process an initial injection that simply renders the pet unconscious and a second shot that causes death this 
allows the owner the chance to say goodbye to a live pet without their emotions stressing the pet it also greatly 
mitigates any tendency toward spasm and other involuntary movement which tends to increase the emotional upset that the 
pets owner experiences for large animals the volumes of barbiturates required are considered by some to be impractical 
although this is standard practice in the united states for horses and cattle other drugs may be available some 
specially formulated combination products are available such as somulose secobarbitalcinchocaine and tributame 
embutramidechloroquinelidocaine which cause deep unconsciousness and cardiac arrest independently with a lower volume of 
injection thus making the process faster safer and more effective occasionally a horse injected with these mixtures may 
display apparent seizure activity before death this may be due to premature cardiac arrest however if normal precautions 
eg sedation with detomidine are taken this is rarely a problem anecdotal reports that long term use of phenylbutazone 
increase the risk of this reaction are unverified after the animal has expired it is not uncommon for the body to have 
posthumous body jerks or for the animal to have a sudden bladder outburst unlike in films the animals eyes do not 
usually close when it dies and this has been stated purely as a drama display for pet death in movies such as marley me 
inhalants gas anesthetics such as isoflurane and sevoflurane can be used for euthanasia of very small animals the 
animals are placed in sealed chambers where high levels of anesthetic gas are introduced death may also be caused using 
carbon dioxide once unconsciousness has been achieved by inhaled anaesthetic carbon dioxide is often used on its own for 
euthanasia of wild animals there are mixed opinions on whether it causes distress when used on its own with human 
experiments lending support to the evidence that it can cause distress and equivocal results in nonhumans in the 
american veterinary medical association avma issued new guidelines for carbon dioxide induction stating that a flow rate 
of to volumemin is optimal for the humane euthanization of small rodents carbon monoxide is often used but some states 
in the us have banned its use in animal shelters although carbon monoxide poisoning is not particularly painful the 
conditions in the gas chamber are often not humane nitrogen has been shown to be effective although some young animals 
are rather resistant and it currently is not widely used cervical dislocation cervical dislocation or displacement of 
the neck is a simple and common method of killing small animals such as mice performed properly it causes instant death 
and it requires no equipment other than a pair of gloves for protection while handling the animal the only possible 
drawback is that the handler must know the proper method of executing the movement which will cause the cervical 
displacement without proper training and method education there is a risk of not causing instant death which can cause 
severe pain if done improperly intracardiac or intraperitoneal injection when intravenous injection is not possible 
euthanasia drugs such as pentobarbital can be injected directly into a heart chamber or body cavity while 
intraperitoneal injection is fully acceptable although it may take up to minutes to take effect in dogs and cats an 
intracardiac ic injection may only be performed on an unconscious or deeply sedated animal in california performing ic 
injections on a fully conscious animal is a crime shooting this can be an appropriate means of euthanasia for large 
animals eg horses cattle deer if performed properly this may be performed by means of free bullet traditionally used for 
shooting horses the horse is shot in the forehead with the bullet directed down the spine through the medulla oblongata 
resulting in instant death the risks are minimal if carried out by skilled personnel in a suitable location captive bolt 
commonly used for cattle and other livestock the bolt is fired through the forehead causing massive disruption of the 
cerebral cortex in cattle this stuns the animal though if left for a prolonged period it will die from cerebral oedema 
some groups such as peta consider this unacceptable death should therefore be rapidly brought about by pithing or 
exsanguination horses are killed outright by the captive bolt making pithing and exsanguination unnecessary reasons for 
euthanasia the reasons for euthanasia of pets and other animals include terminal illness eg cancer or rabies illness or 
accident that is not terminal but would cause suffering for the animal to live with or when the owner cannot afford or 
when the owner has a moral objection to the treatment behavioral problems usually ones that cannot be corrected eg 
aggression old age and deterioration leading to loss of major bodily functions resulting in severe impairment of the 
quality of life lack of home or caretaker research and testing in the course of scientific research or testing animals 
may be euthanized in order to be dissected to prevent suffering after testing to prevent the spread of disease or other 
reasons small animal euthanasia is typically performed in a veterinary clinic or hospital or in an animal shelter and is 
usually carried out by a veterinarian or a veterinary technician working under the veterinarians supervision often 
animal shelter workers are trained to perform euthanasia as well some veterinarians will perform euthanasia at the pet 
owners homethis is virtually mandatory in the case of large animal euthanasia in the case of large animals which have 
sustained injuries this will also occur at the site of the accident for example on a racecourse some animal rights 
organizations support animal euthanasia in certain circumstances and practice euthanasia at shelters that they operate 
remains many pet owners choose to have their pets cremated or buried after the pet is euthanized and there are pet 
funeral homes that specialize in animal burial or cremation otherwise the animal facility will often freeze the body and 
subsequently send it to the local landfill in some instances animals euthanized at shelters or animal control agencies 
have been sent to meat rendering facilities to be processed for use in cosmetics fertilizer gelatin poultry feed 
pharmaceuticals and pet food it was proposed that the presence of pentobarbital in dog food may have caused dogs to 
become less responsive to the drug when being euthanized however a fda study found no dog or cat dna in the foods they 
tested so it was theorized that the drug found in dog food came from euthanized cattle and horses furthermore the level 
of the drug found in pet food was safe see also animal chaplains animal loss animal slaughter animal welfare chick 
culling dysthanasia animal overpopulation in companion animals pet rainbow bridge pets references external links avma 
guidelines on euthanasia euthanasia of animals used for scientific purposes at the university of adelaide world internet 
news chronicles what happens to abandoned dogs national agricultural library united states department of agriculture no 
kill advocacy center no kill shelter advocacy organization horse euthanasia information for the uk recommendations for 
euthanasia of experimental animals part recommendations for euthanasia of experimental animals part chesley v morton v 
georgia department of agriculture and tommy irvin in his official capacity as