
animal welfare is the wellbeing of animals the standards of good animal welfare vary considerably between different 
contexts these standards are under constant review and are debated created and revised by animal welfare groups 
legislators and academics worldwide animal welfare science uses various measures such as longevity disease 
immunosuppression behavior physiology and reproduction although there is debate about which of these indicators provide 
the best information concern for animal welfare is often based on the belief that nonhuman animals are sentient and that 
consideration should be given to their wellbeing or suffering especially when they are under the care of humans these 
concerns can include how animals are slaughtered for food how they are used in scientific research how they are kept as 
pets in zoos farms circuses etc and how human activities affect the welfare and survival of wild species animal welfare 
was a concern of some ancient civilizations but began to take a larger place in western public policy in thcentury great 
britain in the st century it is a significant focus of interest in science ethics and animal welfare organizations there 
are two forms of criticism of the concept of animal welfare coming from diametrically opposite positions one view dating 
back centuries asserts that animals are not consciously aware and hence are unable to experience poor or good welfare 
the other view is based on the animal rights position that animals should not be regarded as property and any use of 
animals by humans is unacceptable accordingly some animal rights proponents argue that the perception of better animal 
welfare facilitates continued and increased exploitation of animals some authorities therefore treat animal welfare and 
animal rights as two opposing positions others see the increasing concern for animal welfare as incremental steps 
towards animal rights the most widely held position in the western world is a midway utilitarian pointofview the 
position that it is morally acceptable for humans to use nonhuman animals provided that adverse effects on animal 
welfare are minimized as much as possible approaches and definitions there are many different approaches to describing 
and defining animal welfare conditions provided by humans providing good animal welfare is sometimes defined by a list 
of positive conditions which should be provided to the animal this approach is taken by the five freedoms and the three 
principles of professor john webster the five freedoms are freedom from thirst and hunger by ready access to fresh water 
and a diet to maintain full health and vigour freedom from discomfort by providing an appropriate environment including 
shelter and a comfortable resting area freedom from pain injury and disease by prevention or rapid diagnosis and 
treatment freedom to express most normal behavior by providing sufficient space proper facilities and company of the 
animals own kind freedom from fear and distress by ensuring conditions and treatment which avoid mental suffering john 
webster defines animal welfare by advocating three positive conditions living a natural life being fit and healthy and 
being happy production by animals in the past many have seen farm animal welfare chiefly in terms of whether the animal 
is producing well the argument is that an animal in poor welfare would not be producing well however many farmed animals 
will remain highly productive despite being in conditions where good welfare is almost certainly compromised eg layer 
hens in battery cages feelings of animals others in the field such as professor ian duncan and professor marian dawkins 
focus more on the feelings of the animal this approach indicates the belief that animals should be considered as 
sentient beings duncan wrote animal welfare is to do with the feelings experienced by animals the absence of strong 
negative feelings usually called suffering and probably the presence of positive feelings usually called pleasure in any 
assessment of welfare it is these feelings that should be assessed dawkins wrote let us not mince words animal welfare 
involves the subjective feelings of animals yewkwang ng defines animal welfare in terms of welfare economics welfare 
biology is the study of living things and their environment with respect to their welfare defined as net happiness or 
enjoyment minus suffering despite difficulties of ascertaining and measuring welfare and relevancy to normative issues 
welfare biology is a positive science dictionary definition in the saunders comprehensive veterinary dictionary animal 
welfare is defined as the avoidance of abuse and exploitation of animals by humans by maintaining appropriate standards 
of accommodation feeding and general care the prevention and treatment of disease and the assurance of freedom from 
harassment and unnecessary discomfort and pain veterinary profession the american veterinary medical association avma 
has defined animal welfare as an animal is in a good state of welfare if as indicated by scientific evidence it is 
healthy comfortable well nourished safe able to express innate behavior and if it is not suffering from unpleasant 
states such as pain fear and distress they have offered the following eight principles for developing and evaluating 
animal welfare policies the responsible use of animals for human purposes such as companionship food fiber recreation 
work education exhibition and research conducted for the benefit of both humans and animals is consistent with the 
veterinarians oath decisions regarding animal care use and welfare shall be made by balancing scientific knowledge and 
professional judgment with consideration of ethical and societal values animals must be provided water food proper 
handling health care and an environment appropriate to their care and use with thoughtful consideration for their 
speciestypical biology and behavior animals should be cared for in ways that minimize fear pain stress and suffering 
procedures related to animal housing management care and use should be continuously evaluated and when indicated refined 
or replaced conservation and management of animal populations should be humane socially responsible and scientifically 
prudent animals shall be treated with respect and dignity throughout their lives and when necessary provided a humane 
death the veterinary profession shall continually strive to improve animal health and welfare through scientific 
research education collaboration advocacy and the development of legislation and regulations environment terrestrial 
animal health code of world organisation for animal health defines animal welfare as how an animal is coping with the 
conditions in which it lives an animal is in a good state of welfare if as indicated by scientific evidence it is 
healthy comfortable well nourished safe able to express innate behaviour and if it is not suffering from unpleasant 
states such as pain fear and distress good animal welfare requires disease prevention and veterinary treatment 
appropriate shelter management nutrition humane handling and humane slaughterkilling animal welfare refers to the state 
of the animal the treatment that an animal receives is covered by other terms such as animal care animal husbandry and 
humane treatment coping professor donald broom defines the welfare of an animal as its state as regards its attempts to 
cope with its environment this state includes how much it is having to do to cope the extent to which it is succeeding 
in or failing to cope and its associated feelings he states that welfare will vary over a continuum from very good to 
very poor and studies of welfare will be most effective if a wide range of measures is used john webster criticized this 
definition for making no attempt to say what constitutes good or bad welfare attitudes animal welfare often refers to a 
utilitarian attitude towards the wellbeing of nonhuman animals it believes the animals can be exploited if the animal 
suffering and the costs of use is less than the benefits to humans this attitude is also known simply as welfarism an 
example of welfarist thought is hugh fearnleywhittingstalls meat manifesto point three of eight is think about the 
animals that the meat you eat comes from are you at all concerned about how they have been treated have they lived well 
have they been fed on safe appropriate foods have they been cared for by someone who respects them and enjoys contact 
with them would you like to be sure of that perhaps its time to find out a bit more about where the meat you eat comes 
from or to buy from a source that reassures you about these points robert garner describes the welfarist position as the 
most widely held in modern society he states that one of the best attempts to clarify this position is given by robert 
nozick consider the following too minimal position about the treatment of animals so that we can easily refer to it let 
us label this position utilitarianism for animals kantianism for people it says maximize the total happiness of all 
living beings place stringent side constraints on what one may do to human beings human beings may not be used or 
sacrificed for the benefit of others animals may be used or sacrificed for the benefit of other people or animals only 
if those benefits are greater than the loss inflicted welfarism is often contrasted with the animal rights and animal 
liberation positions which hold that animals should not be used by humans and should not be regarded as human property 
however it has been argued that both welfarism and animal liberation only make sense if it is assumed that animals have 
subjective welfare new welfarism new welfarism was coined by gary l francione in it is a view that the best way to 
prevent animal suffering is to abolish the causes of animal suffering but advancing animal welfare is a goal to pursue 
in the short term thus for instance new welfarists want to phase out fur farms and animal experiments but in the 
shortterm they try to improve conditions for the animals in these systems so they lobby to make cages less constrictive 
and to reduce the numbers of animals used in laboratories there is some evidence to suggest that empathy is an inherited 
trait genetic multiple studies have found women have greater concern for animals than men possibly the result of it 
being an evolutionarily beneficial trait in societies where women take care of domesticated animals while men hunt laws 
punishing cruelty to animals tend to not just be based on welfare concerns but the belief that such behavior has 
repercussions toward the treatment of other humans by the animal abusers another argument against animal cruelty is 
based on aesthetics within the context of animal research many scientific organisations believe that improved animal 
welfare will provide improved scientific outcomes if an animal in a laboratory is suffering stress or pain it could 
negatively affect the results of the research increased affluence in many regions for the past few decades afforded 
consumers the disposable income to purchase products from high welfare systems the adaptation of more economically 
efficient farming systems in these regions were at the expense of animal welfare and to the financial benefit of 
consumers both of which were factors in driving the demand for higher welfare for farm animals a survey concluded that a 
majority of eu citizens show some willingness to change their usual place of shopping in order to be able to purchase 
more animal welfarefriendly products interest in animal welfare continues to grow with increasing attention being paid 
to it by the media governmental and nongovernmental organizations the volume of scientific research on animal welfare 
has also increased significantly in some countries history principles practice systematic concern for the wellbeing of 
other animals probably arose in the indus valley civilization as religious ancestors were believed to return in animal 
form therefore animals must be treated with respect this belief is exemplified in the existing religion jainism and in 
varieties of other indian religions other religions especially those with roots in the abrahamic religions treat animals 
as the property of their owners codifying rules for their care and slaughter intended to limit the distress pain and 
fear animals experience under human control early legislation which formed the impetus for assessing animal welfare and 
the subsequent development of animal welfare science include the ireland parliament thomas wentworth an act against 
plowing by the tayle and pulling the wooll off living sheep and the massachusetts colony nathaniel ward off the bruite 
creatures liberty and in the massachusetts body of liberties of since when irish mp richard martin brought the cruel 
treatment of cattle act through parliament offering protection from cruelty to cattle horses and sheep the welfare 
approach has had human morality and humane behaviour as its central concerns martin was among the founders of the worlds 
first animal welfare organization the society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or spca in in queen victoria gave 
the society her blessing and it became the rspca the society used members donations to employ a growing network of 
inspectors whose job was to identify abusers gather evidence and report them to the authorities one of the first 
national laws to protect animals was the uk cruelty to animals act followed by the protection of animals act in the us 
it was many years until there was a national law to protect animalsthe animal welfare act of although there were a 
number of states that passed anticruelty laws between and in india animals are protected by the prevention of cruelty to 
animals act significant progress in animal welfare did not take place until the late th century in the uk government 
commissioned an investigationled by professor roger brambellinto the welfare of intensively farmed animals partly in 
response to concerns raised in ruth harrisons book animal machines on the basis of professor brambells report the uk 
government set up the farm animal welfare advisory committee in which became the farm animal welfare council in the 
committees first guidelines recommended that animals require the freedoms to stand up lie down turn around groom 
themselves and stretch their limbs the guidelines have since been elaborated upon to become known as the five freedoms 
in the uk the animal welfare act consolidated many different forms of animal welfare legislation a number of animal 
welfare organisations are campaigning to achieve a universal declaration on animal welfare udaw at the united nations in 
principle the universal declaration would call on the united nations to recognise animals as sentient beings capable of 
experiencing pain and suffering and to recognise that animal welfare is an issue of importance as part of the social 
development of nations worldwide the campaign to achieve the udaw is being coordinated by world animal protection with a 
core working group including compassion in world farming the rspca and the humane society international the 
international branch of hsus t animal welfare science animal welfare science is an emerging field that seeks to answer 
questions raised by the keeping and use of animals such as whether hens are frustrated when confined in cages whether 
the psychological wellbeing of animals in laboratories can be maintained and whether zoo animals are stressed by the 
transport required for international conservation farm animals a major concern for the welfare of farm animals is 
factory farming in which large numbers of animals are reared in confinement at high stocking densities issues include 
the limited opportunities for natural behaviors for example in battery cages veal and gestation crates instead producing 
abnormal behaviors such as tailbiting cannibalism and feather pecking and routine invasive procedures such as beak 
trimming castration and ear notching more extensive methods of farming eg free range can also raise welfare concerns 
such as the mulesing of sheep predation of stock by wild animals and biosecurity farm animals are artificially selected 
for production parameters which sometimes impinge on the animals welfare for example broiler chickens are bred to be 
very large to produce the greatest quantity of meat per animal broilers bred for fast growth have a high incidence of 
leg deformities because the large breast muscles cause distortions of the developing legs and pelvis and the birds 
cannot support their increased body weight as a consequence they frequently become lame or suffer from broken legs the 
increased body weight also puts a strain on their hearts and lungs and ascites often develops in the uk alone up to 
million broilers each year die from the stress of catching and transport before reaching the slaughterhouse another 
concern about the welfare of farm animals is the method of slaughter especially ritual slaughter while the killing of 
animals need not necessarily involve suffering the general public considers that killing an animal reduces its welfare 
this leads to further concerns about premature slaughtering such as chick culling by the laying hen industry in which 
males are slaughtered immediately after hatching because they are superfluous this policy occurs in other farm animal 
industries such as the production of goat and cattle milk raising the same concerns european union laws the european 
commissions activities in this area start with the recognition that animals are sentient beings the general aim is to 
ensure that animals do not endure avoidable pain or suffering and obliges the ownerkeeper of animals to respect minimum 
welfare requirements european union legislation regarding farm animal welfare is regularly redrafted according to 
sciencebased evidence and cultural views for example in legislation was passed which aimed to reduce animal suffering 
during slaughter and on january the european union council directive ec came into act which means that conventional 
battery cages for laying hens are now banned across the union united kingdom laws the animal welfare act makes owners 
and keepers responsible for ensuring that the welfare needs of their animals are met these include the need for a 
suitable environment place to live for a suitable diet to exhibit normal behavior patterns to be housed with or apart 
from other animals if applicable and to be protected from pain injury suffering and disease anyone who is cruel to an 
animal or does not provide for its welfare needs may be banned from owning animals fined up to andor sent to prison in 
the uk the welfare of research animals being used for regulated procedures was historically protected by the animals 
scientific procedures act aspa which is administrated by the home office the act defines regulated procedures as animal 
experiments that could potentially cause pain suffering distress or lasting harm to protected animals initially 
protected animals encompassed all living vertebrates other than humans but in an amendment added a single invertebrate 
species the common octopus primates cats dogs and horses have additional protection over other vertebrates under the act 
revised legislation came into force in january this has been expanded to protect all living vertebrates other than man 
and any living cephalopod fish and amphibia are protected once they can feed independently and cephalopods at the point 
when they hatch embryonic and foetal forms of mammals birds and reptiles are protected during the last third of their 
gestation or incubation period the definition of regulated procedures was also expanded a procedure is regulated if it 
is carried out on a protected animal and may cause that animal a level of pain suffering distress or lasting harm 
equivalent to or higher than that caused by inserting a hypodermic needle according to good veterinary practice it also 
includes modifying the genes of a protected animal if this causes the animal pain suffering distress or lasting harm the 
aspa also considers other issues such as animal sources housing conditions identification methods and the humane killing 
of animals this legislation is widely regarded as the strictest in the world those applying for a license must explain 
why such research cannot be done through nonanimal methods the project must also pass an ethical review panel which aims 
to decide if the potential benefits outweigh any suffering for the animals involved united states laws in the united 
states a federal law called the humane slaughter act was designed to decrease suffering of livestock during slaughter 
the georgia animal protection act of was a state law enacted in response to the inhumane treatment of companion animals 
by a pet store chain in atlanta the act provided for the licensing and regulation of pet shops stables kennels and 
animal shelters and established for the first time minimum standards of care additional provisions called the humane 
euthanasia act were added in and then further expanded and strengthened with the animal protection act of in voters 
passed by a margin of for and against amendment to the florida constitution banning the confinement of pregnant pigs in 
gestation crates in arizona voters passed proposition with support the legislation prohibits the confinement of calves 
in veal crates and breeding sows in gestation crates in the governor of oregon signed legislation prohibiting the 
confinement of pigs in gestation crates and in the governor of colorado signed legislation that phased out both 
gestation crates and veal crates also during california passed proposition known as the prevention of farm animal 
cruelty act which orders new space requirements for farm animals starting in in the us every institution that uses 
vertebrate animals for federally funded laboratory research must have an institutional animal care and use committee 
iacuc each local iacuc reviews research protocols and conducts evaluations of the institutions animal care and use which 
includes the results of inspections of facilities that are required by law the iacuc committee must assess the steps 
taken to enhance animal wellbeing before research can take place this includes research on farm animals according to the 
national institutes of health office of laboratory animal welfare researchers must try to minimize distress in animals 
whenever possible animals used in research and testing may experience pain from induced diseases procedures and toxicity 
the public health service phs policy and animal welfare regulations awrs state that procedures that cause more than 
momentary or slight pain or distress should be performed with appropriate sedation analgesia or anesthesia however 
research and testing studies sometimes involve pain that cannot be relieved with such agents because they would 
interfere with the scientific objectives of the study accordingly federal regulations require that iacucs determine that 
discomfort to animals will be limited to that which is unavoidable for the conduct of scientifically valuable research 
and that unrelieved pain and distress will only continue for the duration necessary to accomplish the scientific 
objectives the phs policy and awrs further state that animals that would otherwise suffer severe or chronic pain and 
distress that cannot be relieved should be painlessly killed at the end of the procedure or if appropriate during the 
procedure the national research councils guide for the care and use of laboratory animals also serves as a guide to 
improve welfare for animals used in research in the us the federation of animal science societies guide for the care and 
use of agricultural animals in research and teaching is a resource addressing welfare concerns in farm animal research 
laboratory animals in the us are also protected under the animal welfare act the united states department of agriculture 
animal and plant health inspection service aphis enforces the animal welfare act aphis inspects animal research 
facilities regularly and reports are published online according to the us department of agriculture usda the total 
number of animals used in the us in was almost million but this does not include rats mice and birds which are not 
covered by welfare legislation but make up approximately of research animals criticisms animals as automatons at one 
time many people denied that nonhuman animals could feel anything and believed that they were incapable of conscious 
thought thus the concept of animal welfare was meaningless for example many cartesians were of this opinion ren 
descartes wrote that animals act without consciousness much like a machine in addition there are accounts of descartes 
visiting slaughter houses to observe how animals died believing that the animals were devoid of sentience descartes 
thought the death throes of animals was akin to taking apart a springdriven clock in the discourse published in 
descartes wrote that the ability to reason and use language involves being able to respond in complex ways to all the 
contingencies of life something that animals clearly cannot do he argued from this that any sounds animals make do not 
constitute language but are simply automatic responses to external stimuli animal rights animal rights advocates such as 
gary l francione and tom regan argue that the animal welfare position advocating for the betterment of the condition of 
animals but without abolishing animal use is inconsistent in logic and ethically unacceptable however there are some 
animal rights groups such as peta which support animal welfare measures in the short term to alleviate animal suffering 
until all animal use is ended according to petas ingrid newkirk in an interview with wikinews there are two issues in 
animal welfare and animal rights if i only could have one thing it would be to end suffering said newkirk if you could 
take things from animals and kill animals all day long without causing them suffering then i would take it everybody 
should be able to agree that animals should not suffer if you kill them or steal from them by taking the fur off their 
backs or take their eggs whatever but you shouldnt put them through torture to do that abolitionism holds that focusing 
on animal welfare not only fails to challenge animal suffering but may actually prolong it by making the exercise of 
property rights over animals appear less unattractive the abolitionists objective is to secure a moral and legal 
paradigm shift whereby animals are no longer regarded as property animal welfare organizations global world organisation 
for animal health oie the intergovernmental organisation responsible for improving animal health worldwide the oie has 
been established for the purpose of projects of international public utility relating to the control of animal diseases 
including those affecting humans and the promotion of animal welfare and animal production food safety world animal 
protection protects animals across the globe world animal protections objectives include helping people understand the 
critical importance of good animal welfare encouraging nations to commit to animalfriendly practices and building the 
scientific case for the better treatment of animals they are global in a sense that they have consultative status at the 
council of europe and collaborate with national governments the united nations the food and agriculture organization and 
the world organization for animal health nongovernment organizations canadian council on animal care the national 
organization responsible for overseeing the care and use of animals involved in canadian science canadian federation of 
humane societies cfhs the only national organization representing humane societies and spcas in canada they provide 
leadership on animal welfare issues and spread the message across canada the canadian veterinary medical association 
brings in veterinary involvement to animal welfare their objective is to share this concern of animals with all members 
of the profession with the general public with government at all levels and with other organizations such as the cfhs 
which have similar concerns compassion in world farming founded over years ago in by a british farmer who became 
horrified by the development of modern intensive factory farming today we campaign peacefully to end all cruel factory 
farming practices we believe that the biggest cause of cruelty on the planet deserves a focused specialised approach so 
we only work on farm animal welfare the movement for compassionate living exists to promote simple vegan living and 
selfreliance as a remedy against the exploitation of humans animals and the earth promote the use of trees and 
veganorganic farming to meet the needs of society for food and natural resources promote a landbased society where as 
much of our food and resources as possible are produced locally national animal interest alliance an animal welfare 
organization in the united states founded in promotes the welfare of animals strengthens the humananimal bond and 
safeguards the rights of responsible animal owners enthusiasts and professionals through research public information and 
sound public policy they host an online library of information about various animalrelated subjects serving as a 
resource for groups and individuals dedicated to responsible animal care and wellbeing national farm animal care council 
their objectives are to facilitate collaboration among members with respect to farm animal care issues in canada to 
facilitate information sharing and communication and to monitor trends and initiatives in both the domestic and 
international market place national office of animal health a british organisation that represents its members drawn 
from the animal medicines industry ontario society for the prevention of cruelty to animals a registered charity 
comprising over communities royal society for the prevention of cruelty to animals a wellknown animal welfare charity in 
england and wales founded in universities federation for animal welfare a uk registered charity established in that 
works to develop and promote improvements in the welfare of all animals through scientific and educational activity 
worldwide see also references external links animal kill counter animal welfare science centre department for the 
environment food and rural affairs page on animal welfare legislation careers helping animals chesley v morton v georgia 
department of agriculture and tommy irvin in his official capacity as commissioner farm animal welfare philosophical 
aspects from the encyclopedia of animal science humane education past present and future from the state of the animals 
ii dr temple grandins web page huntingford fa adams c braithwaite va kadri s pottinger tg sande p turnbull jf review 
paper current issues in fish welfare pdf journal of fish biology doijx