animal psychopathology is the study of mental or behavioral disorders in nonhuman animals historically there has been an 
anthropocentric tendency to emphasize the study of animal psychopathologies as models for human mental illnesses but 
animal psychopathologies can from an evolutionary point of view be more properly regarded as nonadaptive behaviors due 
to some sort of a cognitive disability emotional impairment or distress this article provides a nonexhaustive list of 
animal psychopathologies eating disorders animals in the wild appear to be relatively free from eating disorders 
although their body composition fluctuates depending on seasonal and reproductive cycles however domesticated animals 
including farm laboratory and pet animals are prone to disorders evolutionary fitness drives feeding behavior in wild 
animals the expectation is that farm animals also display this behavior but questions arise if the same principles apply 
to laboratory and pet animals activity anorexia activity anorexia aa is a condition where rats begin to exercise
excessively while simultaneously cutting down on their food intake similar to human anorexia nervosa or hypergymnasia 
when given free access to food and an exercise wheel rats normally develop a balanced routine between exercise and food 
intake which turns them into fit rats however if food intake is restricted and wheel access is unrestricted rats begin 
to exercise more and eat less resulting in excessive weight loss and ultimately death the running cycles shift so that 
most of the running is done in hours before feeding is scheduled in other conditions aa does not develop unrestricted 
food access and restricted wheel access will not cause any significant change in either feeding or exercise routine also 
if rats are restricted both in food intake and wheel access they will adjust accordingly in fact if rats are first 
trained to the feeding schedule and then given unrestricted access to a running wheel they will not develop aa behavior 
results support the notion that the running interferes with adaptation to the new feeding schedule and is associated 
with the reward system in the brain one theory is that running simulates foraging a natural behavior in wild rats 
laboratory rats therefore run forage more in response to food shortages the effect of semistarvation on activity has 
also been studied in primates rhesus macaque males become hyperactive in response to longterm chronic food restriction 
thin sow syndrome thin sow syndrome tss is a behavior observed in stalled sows that is similar to aa where some sows 
after early pregnancy are extremely active eat little and waste away resulting very often in death they suffer from 
emaciation hypothermia a depraved appetite restlessness and hyperactivity the syndrome may mainly be related to social 
and environmental stressors studies on the effects of overcrowding were pioneered by john b calhoun in the s by placing 
norway pregnant rats in a room with plenty of water and food and observing the population growth the population reached 
a number of individuals and did not grow after overcrowding produced stress and psychopathologies even though there was 
plenty of water and food the rats stop eating and stop reproducing these effects have also been observed in jampacked 
beetles when overcrowding occurs female beetles destroy their eggs and turn cannibalistic eating each other male beetles 
lose interest in the females and although there is plenty of water and food there is no population growth similar 
effects have been observed in overcrowded situations in jack rabbits in minnesota and deer in the chesapeake bay stress 
in stalled sows is often perceived as the consequence of the restraint of animals that happens in intensive production 
units the sows that suffer the most restraining conditions are those lactating or pregnant as they have very little room 
to move around because they are kept in barred gestation crates or tethered for the weeks of pregnancy which prevents 
natural and social behaviors however increased movement and freedom is also stressful for adult sows which is usually 
the case after weaning when placed into groups they fight vigorously with one dominant sow emerging that eats greedily 
and becomes large and fat it is also very likely that two subservient sows make up part of the group who actively avoid 
competitive feeding situations and are bullied around by the dominant sow affected sows have poor appetite but often 
show pica and excessive water intake and are anemic pica pica is the ingestion of nonnutritive substances and has so far 
been poorly documented in nonhuman animals in the laboratory it has been examined through the ingestion of kaolin a clay 
mineral by rats rats were induced to intake kaolin by administering various emetic stimuli such as copper sulfate 
apomorphine cisplatin and motion rats are unable to vomit when they ingest a substance that is harmful thus pica in rats 
is analogous to vomiting in other species it is a way for rats to relieve digestive distress in some animals pica seems 
to be an adaptive trait but in others it seems to be a true psychopathology like in the case of some chickens chickens 
can display a type of pica when they are feeddeprived feeding restriction has been adopted by the egg industry to induce 
molting they increase their nonnutritive pecking such as pecking structural features of their environment like wood or 
wire on fences or the feathers of other birds it is a typical response that occurs when feeding is restricted or is 
completely withdrawn some of the nonnutritive pecking may be due to a redirection of foraging related behavior another 
animal that has displayed a more complex pica example are cattle cattle eat bones when they have a phosphorus deficiency 
however in some cases they persist on eating bones even after their phosphorus levels have stabilized and they are 
getting adequate doses of phosphorus in their diet in this case evidence supports both a physical and psychological 
adaptive response cattle that continue to eat bones after their phosphorus levels are adequate do it because of a 
psychological reinforcer the persistence of pica in the seeming absence of a physiological cause might be due to the 
fortuitous acquisition of a conditioned illness during the period of physiological insult cats also display pica 
behavior in their natural environments and there is evidence to support that this behavior has a psychological aspect to 
it some breeds such as the siamese cat are more predisposed to showing this type of behavior than other breeds but 
several types of breeds have been documented to show pica cats have been observed to start by chewing and sucking on 
nonnutritive substances like wool cotton rubber plastic and even cardboard and then progress into ingestion of these 
substances this type of behavior occurs through the first four years of a cats life but it is primarily observed during 
the first two months of life when cats are introduced into new homes is most common theories explaining why this 
behavior becomes active during this time suggest that early weaning and stress as a consequence of separation from the 
mother and littermates and exposure to a new environment are to blame eating wool or other substances may be a soothing 
mechanism that cats develops to cope with the changes pica is also observed predominately during months of a cats life 
when territorial and sexual behaviors emerge pica may be induced by these social stressors other theories contemplated 
include pica as a redirection of preycatchingingestion behavior as a result of indoor confinement especially common 
among oriental breeds due to risk of theft in natural environments pica has been observed in parrots such as macaws and 
other birds and mammals charles munn has been studying amazon macaws lick clay from riverbeds in the amazon to detoxify 
the seeds they eat amazon macaws spend two to three hours a day licking clay munn has found that clay helps counter the 
tannin and alkaloid in the seeds the macaws ingest a strategy that is also used by native cultures in the andes 
mountains in peru pica also affects domesticated animals while drugs like prozac are often able to diminish troublesome 
behaviors in pet dogs they dont seem to help with this eating disorder the following story about bumbley a wire fox 
terrier who appeared on as a result of his eating disorder is taken from a book by dr nicholas dodman this dogs 
presenting problem was light chasing otherwise known as shadow chasing it chased shadows for hours on end even 
excavating through plasterboard walls to pursue its willothewisp illusionsthe one thing that didnt come across clearly 
in the show was that bumbley ate everything in sight and the house had to be bumbleyproofed against his relentless 
ingestion of anything his owners left aroundhe had already had surgery to relieve intestinal obstructions resulting from 
his habit and each day his owners reentered their house with trepidation after work fearing that bumbley might have 
eaten something else dodman talks about new research relating bulimia and compulsive overeating to seizural behavior in 
human patients he suggests that antiepileptic medication might be a possible treatment for some cases of pica in animals 
behavioral disorders behavioral disorders are difficult to study in animal models because it is difficult to know what 
animals are thinking and because animal models used to asses psychopathologies are experimental preparations developed 
to study a condition can a monkey effectively communicate that he is sad or that he feels overwhelmed lacking the 
ability to use language to study behavioral disorders like depression and stress questions the validity of those studies 
conducted it can be difficult to attribute human afflictions to nonhuman animals michael jenike the head of the 
obsessive compulsive disorders institute at mclean hospital argues that the obsessive thought aspect needs to be 
understood in dogs before they can be diagnosed with a disorder such as canine compulsive disorder ccd he says with ocd 
you need to know whats going on in the head its kind of a big leap for me he has a valid point that a major qualifying 
factor of a disorder such as obsessive compulsive disorder there must be the presence of intrusive and nonsensical 
cognitive thoughts or urges that result in compulsions as a method of reducing anxiety there is not enough research that 
shows canines participate in compulsive behaviors to reduce obsessive cognitive anxiety even though jenike remains 
skeptic he admits he is impressed with the studies done on treatment for canines and how effectively they translate to 
treating humans with ocd he along with shuster and dodman observed that when ocd patients were given memantine and ocd 
patients were not those who received memantine had a significant decrease in the intensity and frequency of the 
obsessive and compulsive symptoms jenike conducted larger and more controlled studies after finding these results but he 
still openly admits that he is skeptical that animal compulsions are parallel to obsessive compulsive disorder obsessive 
compulsive disorder ocd obsessive compulsive behavior in animals can be defined as a specific unnecessary action or 
series of actions repeated more often than would normally be expected it is unknown whether animals are able to obsess 
in the same way as humans and because the motivation for compulsive acts in nonhuman animals is unknown the term 
abnormal repetitive behaviour is less misleading a wide variety of animals exhibit behaviors that can be considered 
abnormally repetitive ritualized and stereotyped behaviors though obsessivecompulsive behaviors are often considered to 
be pathological or maladaptive some ritualized and stereotyped behaviors are beneficial these are usually known as fixed 
action patterns these behaviors sometimes share characteristics with obsessivecompulsive behavior including a high 
degree of similarity in form and use among many individuals and a repetitive dimension there are many observable animal 
behaviors with characteristic highly conserved patterns one example is grooming behavior in rats this behavior is 
defined by a specific sequence of actions that does not normally differ between individual rats the rat first begins by 
stroking its whiskers then expands the stroking motion to include the eyes and the ears finally moving on to lick both 
sides of its body other behaviors may be added to the end of this chain but these four actions themselves are fixed its 
ubiquity and high degree of stereotypy suggest that this is a beneficial behavior pattern which has been maintained 
throughout evolutionary history pathological stereotyped behaviors also exist in animals but they do not necessarily 
provide a similar model to ocd in humans feather picking in orangewinged amazon parrots has both a genetic component 
with the behavior being more likely in one sibling if the other does it and more common in parrots close to a door when 
they were housed in groups the same study found that feather picking was more common in females and that there was no 
social transmission of the behavior neighbors of feather picking birds were only more likely to show the behavior as 
well if they were related an evolutionary basis some researchers believe that disadvantageous obsessive compulsive 
behaviors can be thought of as a normally beneficial process gone too far brne suggests that changes of various origin 
in striatal and frontal brain circuits which play a role in predicting needs and threats that may arise in the future 
may result in a hyperactive cognitive harm avoidance system in which a person becomes consciously and unreasonably 
fearful of an unlikely or impossible event this may also be true in other animals genetic factors looking for a genetic 
link hannes lohi a professor of canine genomics at the university of helsinki has observed that canine compulsions are 
typically more common in certain breeds and behavioral dispositions are often shared within the same litter this 
suggests that there is a genetic factor to the disorder lohi hoped to prove this through a questionnaire to dog owners 
and a blood sample of dogs from four breeds miniature and standard bull terriers german shepherds and staffordshire bull 
terriers all breeds shown to be more susceptive to compulsive and repetitive behaviors used to release anxiety ja miller 
suggests that the more we learn through studying obsessive compulsive disorder in dogs the more we can come to 
understand about human biology and the genetics involved in the heredity of susceptibility to disorders such as 
obsessive compulsive disorder research done by the behavior service at the cummings school of veterinary medicine the 
program in medical genetics at the university of massachusetts medical school and the broad institute at the 
massachusetts institute of technology have supposedly located a chromosome in dogs that confers a high risk of 
susceptibility to obsessive compulsive disorder canine chromosome has been found to be most significantly associated 
with obsessive compulsive disorder in dogs or more specifically canine compulsive disorder ccd this breakthrough helped 
further relate ocd in humans to ccd in canines canine chromosome is expressed in the hippocampus of the brain the same 
area that obsessive compulsive disorder is expressed in human patients similar pathways are involved in drug treatment 
responses for both humans and dogs offering more research that the two creatures exhibit symptoms and respond to 
treatment in similar ways this data can help scientists to discover more effective and efficient ways to treat ocd in 
humans through the information they find by studying ccd in dogs animal models animals exhibiting obsessive and 
compulsive behaviors that resemble ocd in humans have been used as a tool for elucidating possible genetic influences on 
the disease potential treatments and to better understand the pathology of this behavior in general while such models 
are useful they are also limited it is unclear whether the behavior is ego dystonic in animals that is it is difficult 
to evaluate whether an animal is aware that its behavior is excessive and unreasonable and whether this awareness is a 
source of anxiety one study done by simon vermeier used neuroimaging to investigate serotonergic and dopaminergic 
neurotransmission in dogs with canine compulsive disorder ccd to measure the serotonin a receptor availability when 
compared to the noncompulsive dogs used as a control group the dogs with ccd were found to have lower receptor 
availability as well as lower subcortical perfusion and hypothalamic availability the results of this study provide 
evidence that there are imbalanced serotonergic and dopaminergic pathways in dogs similarities between other studies 
about human ocd provide construct validity for this study which suggests that the research will be valid and useful in 
continuing to investigate brain activity and drug treatment in obsessive compulsive disorder some treatment has been 
given to dogs with ccd to observe their reactions and how they are similar or different from how humans would react to 
the same pharmaceutical or behavioral treatment a combination of the two approaches has been found to be most effective 
in lowering the intensity and regularity of ocd in both canines and humans pharmaceutically clomipramine was found to be 
more effective than an alternative chemical amitriptyline in treatments for dogs one study by karen overall discovered 
that by combining behavioral therapy with the more effective clomipramine the symptoms of canine compulsive disorder 
decreased by over for all of the dogs involved in the study overall acknowledges that ocd is not something that can be 
completely cured but studies like this are still important because obsessive compulsive disorder can be controlled 
effectively enough so it does not interfere with ones life a valuable and commonly sought after thing for those who 
suffer from the disorder alicia graefs article makes several bold claims that dogs are the future in understanding how 
to better diagnose recognize and treat obsessive compulsive disorder in humans there is evidence supporting her 
statements but the connection between ccd and ocd is not clearly understood so far studies have proved that effective 
treatments in dogs are similarly effective for humans but there are still so many things unknown obsessive compulsive 
disorder is a unique mental disorder that cannot be fully cured it can be controlled and understood and one possible way 
of better doing that might be through studying ccd in canines studying dogs that exhibit compulsive behaviors has led 
scientists to genetic breakthroughs in understanding more how biology and genetics factor into obsessive compulsive 
disorder by observing and studying how ccd manifests in the brain activity behaviors and genes of diagnosed canines 
scientists have been able to use their newfound information to develop better diagnostic tests and more readily 
recognize symptoms and susceptible humans the similar brain functions and behaviors of dogs with ccd and humans with ocd 
suggests they have a connection not only in behavior and symptoms but in reacting to treatments understanding canine 
compulsive disorder in dogs has helped scientists to better understand and apply their learning to developing new and 
more effective ways to treat obsessive compulsive disorder in humans some examples of ways in which rats and mice two of 
the most common animal models have been used to represent human ocd are provided below lever pressing in rats certain 
laboratory rat strains that have been created by controlled breeding for many generations show a higher tendency towards 
compulsive behaviors than other strains lewis rats show more compulsive lever pressing behavior than sprague dawley or 
wistar rats and are less responsive to the anticompulsive drug paroxetine in this study rats were taught to press a 
lever to receive food in an operant conditioning task once food was no longer provided when they pressed the lever rats 
were expected to stop pressing it lewis rats pressed the lever more often than the other two types even though they had 
presumably learned that they would not receive food and continued to press it more often even after treatment with the 
drug an analysis of the genetic differences between the three rat strains might help to identify genes that might be 
responsible for the compulsive behavior rats have also been used to test the possibility of a problem with dopamine 
levels in the brains of animals that exhibit compulsive checking behavior after treating rats with quinpirole a chemical 
that specifically blocks dopamine dd receptors compulsive checking of certain locations in an open field increased some 
components of the checking behavior such as the level of stereotypy in the path animals took to checked locations the 
number of checks and the length of the checks indicated and increase in compulsivity as doses of quinpirole increased 
other components such as the time taken to return from the checked location to the starting point and the time taken to 
make that trip remained constant after the initial injection throughout the experiment this means that there might be 
both allornone and a sensitization aspects in the biology of the dopamine deficiency model of ocd in addition quinpirole 
might reduce a sense of satisfaction in the rats after they check a location causing them to return to that location 
again and again estrogen deficiency in male mice based on findings of changes in ocd symptoms in menstruating women and 
differences in the development of the disease between men and women hill and colleagues set out to research the effect 
of estrogen deprivation on the development of compulsive behavior in mice male mice with an aromatase gene knockout who 
were unable to produce estrogen showed excessive grooming and wheel running behaviors but female mice did not when 
treated with estradiol which replaced estrogen in these mice the behaviors disappeared this study also found that comt 
protein levels decreased in mice that did not produce estrogen and increased in the hypothalamus after 
estrogenreplacement treatment briefly the comt protein is involved in degrading some neurotransmitters including 
dopamine norepinephrine and epinephrine this data suggests that there may be a hormonal component and a hormonegene 
interaction effect that may contribute to obsessive behaviors pets dr nicholas dodman describes a wide variety of 
ocdlike behaviors in his book dogs behaving badly such behaviors typically appear when the dog is placed in a stressful 
situation including an environment that is not very stimulating or a history of abuse different breeds of dog seem to 
display different compulsions lick granuloma or licking repeatedly until ulcers form on the skin affects more large dogs 
like labradors golden retrievers great danes and dobermans while bull terriers german shepherds old english sheepdogs 
rottweilers wirehaired fox terriers and springer spaniels are more likely to snap at imaginary flies or chase light and 
shadows these associations probably have an evolutionary basis although dodman does not clearly explain that aspect of 
the behaviors louis shuster and nicholas dodman noticed that dogs often demonstrate obsessive and compulsive behaviors 
similar to humans canine compulsive disorder ccd is not only specific only to certain breeds of dogs but the breed may 
affect the specific types of compulsions for example bull terriers frequently exhibit obsessively predatory or 
aggressive behaviors breed may factor into the types of compulsions but some behaviors are more common across the canine 
spectrum most commonly ccd is seen in canines as they repeat behaviors such as chasing their tails compulsively chewing 
on objects or licking their paws excessively similar to the common handwashing compulsion many people with obsessive 
compulsive disorder have hallucinating and attacking the air around their head as if there were a bug there is another 
compulsion that has been seen in some dogs circling hair biting staring and sometimes even barking are other examples of 
behaviors that are considered compulsions in dogs when taken to extreme repetitive actions treatment pharmaceutical 
dodman advocates the use of exercised an enriched environment like providing noises for dogs to listen to while owners 
are at work and often prozac an ssri used to treat ocd in humans as treatments shuster and dodman tested pharmaceutical 
treatment on canines with ccd to see if it would work as effectively as it does in humans they used glutamate receptor 
blockers fluoxetine and memantine commonly known as the antidepressant prozac to treat and observe the reactions of dogs 
with compulsions seven of the dogs significantly reduced their compulsions in intensity and frequency after receiving 
medication dodman includes a story about hogan a castrated deaf male dalmatian and his compulsive behavior hogan had a 
history of neglect and abuse before he was adopted by connie and jim who attempted to improve his behavior by teaching 
him to respond to american sign language the following are some excerpts from hogans file all was well for a year and a 
half when suddenly one march morning he woke up and started pawing everything in sight and just wouldnt stop he pawed 
rugs and blankets hardwood floors and linoleum grass and dirt surfacesthe similarity between what he was doing and 
preyseeking behavior was remarkable i do believethat hogan was under some kind of psychological pressure at the time the 
compulsive pawing behavior developed connie and jim were compelled to leave him for some eight hours a day while they 
went to workthe pendulum was set and ready to swing the actual compulsion that develops under such circumstances is less 
relevant than the fact that one does develop the three rs of rehabilitation are exercise nutrition and communication 
first i advised connie to step up hogans exercise to a minimum of thirty minutes of aerobic activity a day in addition i 
advised that hogan should be fed a lowprotein preservativefree diet completing the rehabilitation checklist i exhorted 
connie to work even harder with the signlanguage and instructed her on a new sign to use when hogan started digging the 
sign was a piece of card with the letter h written on it in thick black pen connie was to show hogan this sign as soon 
as possible after he engaged in a bout of unwanted pawing and then leave the room the idea was to let him know that the 
behavior was not wanted by signaling to him that connie was about to leave the roomcall me a coward but i didnt think 
that alone would cut it because of previous experiences with canine compulsive disorders so employing a 
beltandsuspenders strategy i also advised medicating hogan with the tricyclic antidepressant elavil theoretically elavil 
wouldnt be that good in obsessivecompulsive behavior but limited for reasons of expense and bearing in mind the possible 
contribution of separation anxiety elavil was my best shot it took six months before hogan was over the hump of 
treatment successat this time hogan only engaged in occasional pawing of significantly reduced intensity and the pawing 
only occurred in moments of stress connie reported that stresses particularly likely to induce pawing included being 
unable to find her and sensing that he was about to be left alonehogan continued to improve and reached a point at which 
he was almost pawingfree but not quite that seems to be the way with compulsive disorders in man and beast they can be 
reduced to the level of permitting affectees to lead relatively normal lives but there are occasional relapses addiction 
sugar addiction has been examined in laboratory rats and it develops in the same way that drug addiction develops eating 
sugary foods causes the brain to release natural chemicals called opioids and dopamine in the limbic system tasty food 
can activate opioid receptors in the ventral tegmental area and thereby stimulate cells that release dopamine in the 
nucleus accumbens nac the brain recognizes the intense pleasure derived from the dopamine and opioids release and learns 
to crave more sugar dependence is created through these natural rewards the sugary treats and the opioid and dopamine 
released into the synapses of the mesolimbic system the hippocampus the insula and the caudate activate when rats crave 
sugar which are the same areas that become active when drug addicts crave the drug sugar is good because its provides 
energy but when the body becomes dependent on the sugar intake and the nervous system goes through a change somatic 
signs of withdrawal begin to appear like chattering teeth forepaw tremors and head shakes when sugar is not ingested 
morphine tolerance a measure of addiction was observed in rats and their tolerance on morphine was attributed to 
environmental cues and the systemic effects of the drug morphine tolerance does not depend merely on the frequency of 
pharmacological stimulation but rather on both the number of pairings of a drugpredictive cue with the systemic effects 
of the drug rats became significantly more tolerant to morphine when they had been exposed to a paired administration 
than those rats that were not administered morphine along with a drugpredictive cue depression using dogs martin 
seligman and his colleagues pioneered the study of depression in the animal model of learned helplessness at the 
university of pennsylvania dogs were separated into three groups the control group group a had control over when they 
were being shocked and group b had no control over when they were being shocked after the shocking condition the dogs 
were tested in a shuttle box where they could escape shock by jumping over a partition to eliminate an interference 
effect that the dogs did not learn responses while being shocked that would interfere with their normal escape behavior 
the dogs were immobilized using curare a paralyzing drug while they were being shocked both the control group and group 
a tended to jump over the partition to escape shock while group b dogs did not jump and would passively take the shock 
the dogs in group b perceived that the outcome was not related to their efforts consequently a theory emerged that 
attributed the behavior of the animals to the effects of the shock as a stressor so extreme that it depleted a 
neurochemical needed by the animals for movement after the dogs study the effects of helplessness have been tested in 
species from fish to cats most recently learned helplessness has been studied in rhesus macaques using inescapable shock 
evoked through stress situations like forced swimming behavioral despair tasks tails suspension and pinch induced 
catalepsy situations that render the monkey incapable of controlling the environment depression and low mood were found 
to be of a communicative nature they signal yielding in a hierarchy conflict or a need for help low mood or extreme low 
mood depression can regulate a pattern of engagement and foster disengagement from unattainable goals low mood increases 
an organisms ability to cope with the adaptive challenges characteristic of unpropitious situations in which effort to 
pursue a major goal will likely result in danger loss bodily damage or wasted effort being apathetic can have a fitness 
advantage for the organism depression has also been studied as a behavioral strategy used by vertebrates to increase 
their personal or inclusive fitness in the threat of parasites and pathogens the lack of neurogenesis has been linked to 
depression animals with stress isolated cortisol levels show a decrease in neurogenesis and antidepressants have been 
discovered to promote neurogenesis rene hen and his colleagues at columbia university ran a study on rats in which they 
blocked neurogenesis by applying radiation to the hippocampal area to test the efficacy of antidepressants results 
suggested that antidepressants failed to work when neurogenesis was inhibited stress robert sapolsky has extensively 
studied baboons in their natural environment in the serengeti in africa he noticed that baboons have very similar 
hierarchies in their society as do humans they spend very few hours searching for food and fulfilling their primary 
needs leaving them with time to develop their social network in primates mental stresses show up in the body primates 
experience psychological stresses that can elicit physiological responses that overtime can make them sick sapolsky 
observed the baboons ranks personalities and social affiliations then collected blood samples of the baboons to control 
the cortisol stress hormone levels of the baboons then matched social position to cortisol levels most of the data have 
been collected from male baboons because at any given time percent of the females were pregnant three factors influenced 
a baboons cortisol levels friendships perspective and rank baboons that played with infants and cultivated friendships 
could tell if a situation was a real threat and could tell if they were going to win or lose and were top ranking had 
lower levels of cortisol cortisol levels rise with age and hippocampal cells express fewer hormone receptors on their 
surface to protect themselves from excess making it harder to control stress levels cortisol levels are elevated in half 
of people suffering from major depression it is the hippocampal region that is affected by both stress can have negative 
effects on gastrointestinal function causing ulcers and it can also decrease sex drive effect sleeping patterns and 
elevate blood pressure but it can also stimulate and motivate when animals experience stress they are generally more 
alert than when they are not stressed it may help them be better aware of unfamiliar environments and possible threats 
to their life in these environments yerkes and dodson developed a law that explains the empirical relationship between 
arousal and performance illustrated by and inverted ushape graph according to the yerkesdodson law performance increases 
as does cognitive arousal but only to a certain point the downward part of the ushape is caused by stress and as stress 
increases so does efficiency and performance but to a certain point when stress becomes too great performance and 
efficiency decline sapolsky has also studied stress in rats and his results indicate that early experiences in young 
rats have strong lasting effects rats that were exposed to human handling stressful situation had finely tuned stress 
responses that may have lowered their lifetime exposure to stress hormones compared to those that were not handled in 
short stress can be adaptive the more exposure to stressful situations the better the rat can handle that situation 
stereotypies stereotypies are repetitive sometimes abnormal behaviors like pacing on the perch for birds there are 
adaptive stereotypic behaviors such as grooming in cats and preening in birds captive parrots commonly perform a range 
of stereotypies these behaviors are repeated identically and lack any function or goal captive parrots perform striking 
oral and locomotor stereotypies like pacing on the perch or repetitive play with a certain toy feather picking and loud 
vocalizations can be stereotypies but are not as rigid and may be reactions to confinement stress boredom and loneliness 
as studies have shown that parrots that are in cages closest to the door are the most prone to feather pick or scream 
feather picking is not a true stereotypy and is more like hair pulling in human and loud vocalizations or screaming can 
be a stereotypy but vocalization is part of a parrots natural behavior captive parrots lack sufficient stimulation 
presumably they suffer from lack of companionship and opportunities to forage stereotypies can evolve from the social 
environment for example the presence or absence of certain social stimuli social isolation low feeder space and high 
stocking density especially for tail biting in pigs these behaviors can also be transmitted through social learning bank 
voles pigeons and pigs when housed next to animals that show stereotypies pick them up as well as through stimulus 
enhancement which is what happens in tail biting in pigs and feather pecking by hens stereotypies may be coping 
mechanisms as results suggest from study on tethered and stalled sows sows that are tethered and stalled exhibited more 
stereotypies like licking and rubbing than sows that are in groups outdoors this abnormal behavior seems to be related 
to opioid related to the reward system receptor density in sows prolonged confinement being tethered or being in 
gestation crates results in abnormal behaviors and stereotypies mu and kappa receptors are associated with aversion 
behaviors and mu receptor density is greater in tethered sows than sows that are in groups outdoors however sows with 
stereotypy behaviors experienced a decrease both in mu and kappa receptor density in the brain suggesting that 
inactivity increases mu receptor density and stereotypy development decrease both kappa and mu receptor density 
selfaggression rhesus macaques have been observed to display selfaggression sa including selfbiting selfclasping 
selfslapping selfrubbing and threatening of body parts the rhesus macaques observed were individually caged and free of 
disease their selfaggression level rose in stressful and stimulating conditions such as moving from one cage to another 
stumptailed macaques were studied to examine the source of their sa sa increased in an impoverished environment and 
results support that sa may increase sensory input in poor environments captive macaques do not socialize the way wild 
macaques do which may affect sa when allowed to socialize by putting another macaque in the cage or not putting them in 
a cage sa levels in macaques decrease results indicate that sa is a form of redirected social aggression sa is related 
to frustration and social status especially in macaques that have an intermediate dominance rank see also anthrozoology 
list of abnormal behaviours in animals references anxiety and compulsive disorders in dogs petmd httpwwwpetmdcomdogconditionsbehavioral 
graef a october can dogs lead us to a cure for obsessivecompulsive disorder care make a difference httpwwwcarecomcausescandogsleadustoacureforobsessivecompulsivedisorderhtml