
the capybara hydrochoerus hydrochaeris is a large rodent of the genus hydrochoerus of which the only other member is the 
lesser capybara hydrochoerus isthmius the capybara is the largest rodent in the world close relatives are guinea pigs 
and rock cavies and it is more distantly related to the agouti chinchillas and the coypu native to south america the 
capybara inhabits savannas and dense forests and lives near bodies of water it is a highly social species and can be 
found in groups as large as individuals but usually lives in groups of individuals the capybara is not a threatened 
species and is hunted for its meat hide and also for a grease from its thick fatty skin which is used in the 
pharmaceutical trade etymology its common name is derived from tupi kaapiara a complex agglutination of ka leaf pi 
slender eat ara a suffix for agent nouns meaning one who eats slender leaves or grasseater the scientific name both 
hydrochoerus and hydrochaeris comes from greek hydor water choiros pig hog classification and phylogeny the capybara and 
the lesser capybara belong to the subfamily hydrochoerinae along with the rock cavies the living capybaras and their 
extinct relatives were previously classified in their own family hydrochoeridae since molecular phylogenetic studies 
have recognized a close relationship between hydrochoerus and kerodon supporting placement of both genera in a subfamily 
of caviidae paleontological classifications have yet to incorporate this new taxonomy and continue to use hydrochoeridae 
for all capybaras while using hydrochoerinae for the living genus and its closest fossil relatives such as neochoerus 
the taxonomy of fossil hydrochoerines is also in a state of flux in recent years the diversity of fossil hydrochoerines 
has been substantially reduced this is largely due to the recognition that capybara molar teeth show strong variation in 
shape over the life of an individual in one instance material once referred to four genera and seven species on the 
basis of differences in molar shape is now thought to represent differently aged individuals of a single species 
cardiatherium paranense description the capybara has a heavy barrelshaped body and short head with reddishbrown fur on 
the upper part of its body that turns yellowishbrown underneath its sweat glands can be found in the surface of the 
hairy portions of its skin an unusual trait among rodents the animal lacks under hair and guard hair differs little from 
over hair adult capybaras grow to to cm to ft in length stand to cm to in tall at the withers and typically weigh to kg 
to lb with an average in the venezuelan llanos of kg lb the top recorded weights are kg lb for a wild female from brazil 
and kg lb for a wild male from uruguay the dental formula is capybaras have slightly webbed feet and vestigial tails 
their hind legs are slightly longer than their forelegs they have three toes on their rear feet and four toes on their 
front feet their muzzles are blunt with nostrils and the eyes and ears are near the top of their heads females are 
slightly heavier than males its karyotype has n and fn ecology capybaras are semiaquatic mammals found throughout almost 
all countries of south america except chile they live in densely forested areas near bodies of water such as lakes 
rivers swamps ponds and marshes as well as flooded savannah and along rivers in tropical forest capybara have flourished 
in cattle ranches they roam in home ranges averaging hectares acres in highdensity populations many escapees from 
captivity can also be found in similar watery habitats around the world sightings are fairly common in florida although 
a breeding population has not yet been confirmed in one was spotted in the central coast of california diet and 
predation capybaras are herbivores grazing mainly on grasses and aquatic plants as well as fruit and tree bark they are 
very selective feeders and will feed on the leaves of one species and disregard other species surrounding it they eat a 
greater variety of plants during the dry season as fewer plants are available while they eat grass during the wet season 
they have to switch to more abundant reeds during the dry season plants that capybaras eat during the summer lose their 
nutritional value in the winter and therefore are not consumed at that time the capybaras jaw hinge is not perpendicular 
and they thus chew food by grinding backandforth rather than sidetoside capybaras are coprophagous meaning they eat 
their own feces as a source of bacterial gut flora to help digest the cellulose in the grass that forms their normal 
diet and to extract the maximum protein and vitamins from their food they may also regurgitate food to masticate again 
similar to cudchewing by a cow as is the case with other rodents the front teeth of capybaras grow continually to 
compensate for the constant wear from eating grasses their cheek teeth also grow continuously like its cousin the guinea 
pig the capybara does not have the capacity to synthesize vitamin c and capybaras not supplemented with vitamin c in 
captivity have been reported to develop gum disease as a sign of scurvy they can have a life span of years on average 
but live less than four years in the wild as they are a favourite food of jaguar puma ocelot eagle and caiman the 
capybara is also the preferred prey of the anaconda social organisation capybaras are gregarious while they sometimes 
live solitarily they are more commonly found in groups that average individuals with two to four adult males four to 
seven adult females and the remainder juveniles capybara groups can consist of as many as or individuals during the dry 
season when the animals gather around available water sources males establish social bonds dominance or general group 
census they can make doglike barks when threatened or when females are herding young capybaras have two types of scent 
glands a morillo located on the snout and anal glands both sexes have these glands but males have much larger morillos 
and use their anal glands more frequently the anal glands of males are also lined with detachable hairs a crystalline 
form of scent secretion is coated on these hairs and is released when in contact with objects like plants these hairs 
have a longerlasting scent mark and are tasted by other capybaras capybara scentmark by rubbing their morillo on an 
object or by walking over scrub and marking it with their anal glands capybara can spread their scent further by 
urinating however females usually mark without urinating and scentmark less frequently than males overall females mark 
more often during the wet season when they are in estrus in addition to objects males will also scentmark females 
reproduction when in estrus the females scent changes subtly and nearby males begin pursuit in addition a female will 
alert males she is in estrus by whistling though her nose during mating the female has the advantage and mating choice 
capybaras mate only in water and if a female does not want to mate with a certain male she will either submerge or leave 
the water dominant males are highly protective of the females but they usually cannot prevent all the subordinates from 
copulating the larger the group the harder it is for the male to watch all the females dominant males secure 
significantly more matings than each subordinate but subordinate males as a class are responsible for more matings than 
each dominant male the lifespan of the capybaras sperm is longer than that of other rodents capybara gestation is days 
and usually produces a litter of four capybara babies but may produce between one and eight in a single litter birth is 
on land and the female will rejoin the group within a few hours of delivering the newborn capybaras which will join the 
group as soon as they are mobile within a week the young can eat grass but will continue to sucklefrom any female in the 
groupuntil weaned at about weeks the young will form a group within the main group alloparenting has been observed in 
this species breeding peaks between april and may in venezuela and between october and november in mato grosso brazil 
activities though quite agile on land capable of running as fast as a horse capybaras are equally at home in the water 
they are excellent swimmers and can remain completely submerged for up to five minutes an ability they use to evade 
predators capybaras can sleep in water keeping only their noses out of the water as temperatures increase during the day 
they wallow in water and then graze during the late afternoon and early evening they also spend a lot of time wallowing 
in mud they rest around midnight and then continue to graze before dawn conservation and human interaction capybaras are 
not considered a threatened species their population is stable throughout most of their south american range though in 
some areas hunting has reduced their numbers capybaras are hunted for their meat and pelts in some areas and otherwise 
killed by humans who see their grazing as competition for livestock in some areas they are farmed which has the effect 
of ensuring the wetland habitats are protected their survival is aided by their ability to breed rapidly capybaras can 
be found in many areas in zoos and parks and may live for years in captivity capybaras are gentle and will usually allow 
humans to pet and handfeed them the european association of zoos and aquaria eaza tasked drusillas park in alfriston 
sussex to keep the studbook for capybaras to monitor captive populations in europe the studbook includes information 
about all births deaths and movements of capybaras as well as how they are related capybaras are farmed for meat and 
skins in south america the meat is considered unsuitable to eat in some areas while in other areas it is considered an 
important source of protein in parts of south america especially in venezuela capybara meat is popular during lent and 
holy week as the catholic church previously gave a special dispensation that allows for its consumption while other 
meats are generally forbidden although it is illegal in some states capybaras are occasionally kept as pets in the 
united states gallery see also josephoartigasia monesi an extinct species identified as the largest rodent ever in 
medicine see kurloff cells references external links data related to hydrochoerus hydrochaeris at wikispecies animal 
diveristy web hydrochoerus hydrochaeris video of captive capybara using a warm pool