the domestic cat felis catus or felis silvestris catus is a small usually furry domesticated and carnivorous mammal they 
are often called a housecat when kept as an indoor pet or simply a cat when there is no need to distinguish them from 
other felids and felines cats are often valued by humans for companionship and their ability to hunt vermin and 
household pests cats are similar in anatomy to the other felids with strong flexible bodies quick reflexes sharp 
retractable claws and teeth adapted to killing small prey cat senses fit a crepuscular and predatory ecological niche 
cats can hear sounds too faint or too high in frequency for human ears such as those made by mice and other small 
animals they can see in near darkness like most other mammals cats have poorer color vision and a better sense of smell 
than humans despite being solitary hunters cats are a social species and cat communication includes the use of a variety 
of vocalizations mewing purring trilling hissing growling and grunting as well as cat pheromones and types of 
catspecific body language cats have a high breeding rate under controlled breeding they can be bred and shown as 
registered pedigree pets a hobby known as cat fancy failure to control the breeding of pet cats by neutering and the 
abandonment of former household pets has resulted in large numbers of feral cats worldwide requiring population control 
since cats were cult animals in ancient egypt they were commonly believed to have been domesticated there but there may 
have been instances of domestication as early as the neolithic from around years ago bc a genetic study in concluded 
that domestic cats are descended from african wildcats felis silvestris lybica having diverged around bc in west asia 
cats are the most popular pet in the world and are now found in almost every place where humans live nomenclature and 
etymology the english word cat old english catt is in origin a loanword introduced to many languages of europe from 
latin cattus and byzantine greek including portuguese and spanish gato french chat german katze lithuanian kat and old 
church slavonic kotka among others the ultimate source of the word is afroasiatic presumably from late egyptian aute the 
feminine of aus wildcat the word was introduced together with the domestic animal itself to the roman republic by the 
first century bc an alternative word with cognates in many languages is english puss pussycat attested only from the th 
century it may have been introduced from dutch poes or from low german puuskatte related to swedish kattepus or 
norwegian pus pusekatt similar forms exist in lithuanian pui and irish puiscn the etymology of this word is unknown but 
it may have simply arisen from a sound used to attract a cat a group of cats is referred to as a clowder or a glaring a 
male cat is called a tom or tomcat or a gib if neutered an unaltered female is called a queen and a prepubescent 
juvenile is referred to as a kitten although spayed females have no commonly used name in some rare instances an 
immature or spayed female is referred to as a molly the male progenitor of a cat especially a pedigreed cat is its sire 
and its female progenitor is its dam in early modern english the word kitten was interchangeable with the nowobsolete 
word catling a pedigreed cat is one whose ancestry is recorded by a cat fancier organization a purebred cat is one whose 
ancestry contains only individuals of the same breed many pedigreed and especially purebred cats are exhibited as show 
cats cats of unrecorded mixed ancestry are referred to as domestic shorthaired or domestic longhaired cats by coat type 
or commonly as randombred moggies chiefly british or using terms borrowed from dog breeding mongrels or muttcats while 
the african wildcat is the ancestral subspecies from which domestic cats are descended and wildcats and domestic cats 
can completely interbreed several intermediate stages occur between domestic pet and pedigree cats on one hand and those 
entirely wild animals on the other the semiferal cat a mostly outdoor cat is not owned by any one individual but is 
generally friendly to people and may be fed by several households feral cats are associated with human habitation areas 
and may be fed by people or forage in rubbish but are typically wary of human interaction taxonomy and evolution the 
felids are a rapidly evolving family of mammals that share a common ancestor only million years ago and include lions 
tigers cougars and many others within this family domestic cats felis catus are part of the genus felis which is a group 
of small cats containing about seven species depending upon classification scheme members of the genus are found 
worldwide and include the jungle cat felis chaus of southeast asia european wildcat f silvestris silvestris african 
wildcat f s lybica the chinese mountain cat f bieti and the arabian sand cat f margarita among others the domestic cat 
was first classified as felis catus by carolus linnaeus in the th edition of his systema naturae in because of modern 
phylogenetics domestic cats are usually regarded as another subspecies of the wildcat f silvestris this has resulted in 
mixed usage of the terms as the domestic cat can be called by its subspecies name felis silvestris catus wildcats have 
also been referred to as various subspecies of f catus but in the international commission on zoological nomenclature 
fixed the name for wildcats as f silvestris the most common name in use for the domestic cat remains f catus following a 
convention for domesticated animals of using the earliest the senior synonym proposed sometimes the domestic cat has 
been called felis domesticus or felis domestica as proposed by german naturalist j c p erxleben in but these are not 
valid taxonomic names and have been used only rarely in scientific literature because linnaeuss binomial takes 
precedence a population of transcaucasian black feral cats was once classified as felis daemon satunin but now this 
population is considered to be a part of domestic cat all the cats in this genus share a common ancestor that probably 
lived around million years ago in asia the exact relationships within the felidae are close but still uncertain eg the 
chinese mountain cat is sometimes classified under the name felis silvestris bieti as a subspecies of the wildcat like 
the north african variety f s lybica in comparison to dogs cats have not undergone major changes during the 
domestication process as the form and behavior of the domestic cat is not radically different from those of wildcats and 
domestic cats are perfectly capable of surviving in the wild fully domesticated house cats often interbreed with feral f 
catus populations this limited evolution during domestication means that hybridisation can occur with many other felids 
notably the asian leopard cat several natural behaviors and characteristics of wildcats may have preadapted them for 
domestication as pets these traits include their small size social nature obvious body language love of play and 
relatively high intelligence they may also have an inborn tendency towards tameness cats have either a mutualistic or 
commensal relationship with humans two main theories are given about how cats were domesticated in one people 
deliberately tamed cats in a process of artificial selection as they were useful predators of vermin this has been 
criticized as implausible because the reward for such an effort may have been too little cats generally do not carry out 
commands and although they do eat rodents other species such as ferrets or terriers may be better at controlling these 
pests the alternative idea is that cats were simply tolerated by people and gradually diverged from their wild relatives 
through natural selection as they adapted to hunting the vermin found around humans in towns and villages genetics the 
domesticated cat and its closest wild ancestor are both diploid organisms that possess chromosomes and roughly genes 
about heritable genetic disorders have been identified in cats many similar to human inborn errors the high level of 
similarity among the metabolism of mammals allows many of these feline diseases to be diagnosed using genetic tests that 
were originally developed for use in humans as well as the use of cats as animal models in the study of the human 
diseases anatomy domestic cats are similar in size to the other members of the genus felis typically weighing between 
and kg and lb however some breeds such as the maine coon can occasionally exceed kg lb conversely very small cats less 
than kg lb have been reported the world record for the largest cat is kg lb the smallest adult cat ever officially 
recorded weighed around kg lb feral cats tend to be lighter as they have more limited access to food than house cats in 
the boston area the average feral adult male will weigh kg lb and average feral female kg lb cats average about cm in in 
height and cm in in headbody length males being larger than females with tails averaging cm in in length cats have seven 
cervical vertebrae as do almost all mammals thoracic vertebrae humans have seven lumbar vertebrae humans have five three 
sacral vertebrae like most mammals humans have five and a variable number of caudal vertebrae in the tail humans retain 
three to five caudal vertebrae fused into an internal coccyx the extra lumbar and thoracic vertebrae account for the 
cats spinal mobility and flexibility attached to the spine are ribs the shoulder and the pelvis unlike human arms cat 
forelimbs are attached to the shoulder by freefloating clavicle bones which allow them to pass their bodies through any 
space into which they can fit their heads the cat skull is unusual among mammals in having very large eye sockets and a 
powerful and specialized jaw within the jaw cats have teeth adapted for killing prey and tearing meat when it overpowers 
its prey a cat delivers a lethal neck bite with its two long canine teeth inserting them between two of the preys 
vertebrae and severing its spinal cord causing irreversible paralysis and death compared to other felines domestic cats 
have narrowly spaced canine teeth which is an adaptation to their preferred prey of small rodents which have small 
vertebrae the premolar and first molar together compose the carnassial pair on each side of the mouth which efficiently 
shears meat into small pieces like a pair of scissors these are vital in feeding since cats small molars cannot chew 
food effectively cats like dogs are digitigrades they walk directly on their toes with the bones of their feet making up 
the lower part of the visible leg cats are capable of walking very precisely because like all felines they directly 
register that is they place each hind paw almost directly in the print of the corresponding fore paw minimizing noise 
and visible tracks this also provides sure footing for their hind paws when they navigate rough terrain unlike most 
mammals when cats walk they use a pacing gait that is they move the two legs on one side of the body before the legs on 
the other side this trait is shared with camels and giraffes as a walk speeds up into a trot a cats gait changes to be a 
diagonal gait similar to that of most other mammals and many other land animals such as lizards the diagonally opposite 
hind and fore legs move simultaneously like almost all members of the felidae cats have protractable and retractable 
claws in their normal relaxed position the claws are sheathed with the skin and fur around the paws toe pads this keeps 
the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows the silent stalking of prey the claws on the 
fore feet are typically sharper than those on the hind feet cats can voluntarily extend their claws on one or more paws 
they may extend their claws in hunting or selfdefense climbing kneading or for extra traction on soft surfaces most cats 
have five claws on their front paws and four on their rear paws the fifth front claw the dewclaw is proximal to the 
other claws more proximally is a protrusion which appears to be a sixth finger this special feature of the front paws on 
the inside of the wrists is the carpal pad also found on the paws of big cats and of dogs it has no function in normal 
walking but is thought to be an antiskidding device used while jumping some breeds of cats are prone to polydactyly 
extra toes and claws these are particularly common along the northeast coast of north america physiology cats are 
familiar and easily kept animals and their physiology has been particularly well studied it generally resembles that of 
other carnivorous mammals but displays several unusual features probably attributable to cats descent from 
desertdwelling species for instance cats are able to tolerate quite high temperatures humans generally start to feel 
uncomfortable when their skin temperature passes about c f but cats show no discomfort until their skin reaches around c 
f and can tolerate temperatures of up to c f if they have access to water cats conserve heat by reducing the flow of 
blood to their skin and lose heat by evaporation through their mouths cats have minimal ability to sweat with glands 
located primarily in their paw pads and pant for heat relief only at very high temperatures but may also pant when 
stressed a cats body temperature does not vary throughout the day this is part of cats general lack of circadian rhythms 
and may reflect their tendency to be active both during the day and at night cats feces are comparatively dry and their 
urine is highly concentrated both of which are adaptations to allow cats to retain as much water as possible their 
kidneys are so efficient they can survive on a diet consisting only of meat with no additional water and can even 
rehydrate by drinking seawater cats are obligate carnivores their physiology has evolved to efficiently process meat and 
they have difficulty digesting plant matter in contrast to omnivores such as rats which only require about protein in 
their diet about of a cats diet must be protein cats are unusually dependent on a constant supply of the amino acid 
arginine and a diet lacking arginine causes marked weight loss and can be rapidly fatal another unusual feature is that 
the cat cannot produce taurine with taurine deficiency causing macular degeneration wherein the cats retina slowly 
degenerates causing irreversible blindness since cats tend to eat all of their prey they obtain minerals by digesting 
animal bones and a diet composed only of meat may cause calcium deficiency a cats gastrointestinal tract is adapted to 
meat eating being much shorter than that of omnivores and having low levels of several of the digestive enzymes needed 
to digest carbohydrates these traits severely limit the cats ability to digest and use plantderived nutrients as well as 
certain fatty acids despite the cats meatoriented physiology several vegetarian or vegan cat foods have been marketed 
that are supplemented with chemically synthesized taurine and other nutrients in attempts to produce a complete diet 
however some of these products still fail to provide all the nutrients cats require and diets containing no animal 
products pose the risk of causing severe nutritional deficiencies cats do eat grass occasionally a proposed explanations 
is that cats use grass as a source of folic acid another proposed explanation is that it is used to supply dietary fiber 
senses cats have excellent night vision and can see at only onesixth the light level required for human vision this is 
partly the result of cat eyes having a tapetum lucidum which reflects any light that passes through the retina back into 
the eye thereby increasing the eyes sensitivity to dim light another adaptation to dim light is the large pupils of cats 
eyes unlike some big cats such as tigers domestic cats have slit pupils these slit pupils can focus bright light without 
chromatic aberration and are needed since the domestic cats pupils are much larger relative to their eyes than the 
pupils of the big cats indeed at low light levels a cats pupils will expand to cover most of the exposed surface of its 
eyes however domestic cats have rather poor color vision and like most nonprimate mammals have only two types of cones 
optimized for sensitivity to blue and yellowish green they have limited ability to distinguish between red and green a 
paper reported a response to middle wavelengths from a system other than the rods which might be due to a third type of 
cone however this appears to be an adaptation to low light levels rather than representing true trichromatic vision cats 
have excellent hearing and can detect an extremely broad range of frequencies they can hear higherpitched sounds than 
either dogs or humans detecting frequencies from hz to hz a range of octaves while humans and dogs both have ranges of 
about octaves cats can hear ultrasound which is probably important in hunting rather than intraspecific communication 
because many species of rodents make ultrasonic calls cats hearing is also sensitive and among the best of any mammal 
being most acute in the range of hz to khz this sensitivity is further enhanced by the cats large movable outer ears 
their pinnae which both amplify sounds and help detect the direction of a noise cats have an acute sense of smell due in 
part to their welldeveloped olfactory bulb and a large surface of olfactory mucosa about cm in in area which is about 
twice that of humans cats are sensitive to pheromones such as mercaptomethylbutanol which they use to communicate 
through urine spraying and marking with scent glands many cats also respond strongly to plants that contain 
nepetalactone especially catnip as they can detect that substance at less than one part per billion about of cats are 
affected by nepetalactone this response is also produced by other plants such as silver vine actinidia polygama and the 
herb valerian it may be caused by the smell of these plants mimicking a pheromone and stimulating cats social or sexual 
behaviors cats have relatively few taste buds compared to humans domestic and wild cats share a gene mutation that keeps 
their sweet taste buds from binding to sugary molecules leaving them with no ability to taste sweetness their taste buds 
instead respond to amino acids bitter tastes and acids to aid with navigation and sensation cats have dozens of movable 
whiskers vibrissae over their bodies especially their faces these provide information on the width of gaps and on the 
location of objects in the dark both by touching objects directly and by sensing air currents they also trigger 
protective blink reflexes to protect the eyes from damage health the average lifespan of pet cats has risen in recent 
years in the early s it was about seven years rising to years in and years in however cats have been reported as 
surviving into their s with the oldest known cat creme puff dying at a verified age of spaying or neutering increases 
life expectancy one study found neutered male cats live twice as long as intact males while spayed female cats live 
longer than intact females nonneutered cats in the us are four times as likely to be hit by a car as a neutered cat and 
are three times more likely to require treatment for an animal bite having a cat neutered confers health benefits 
because castrated males cannot develop testicular cancer spayed females cannot develop uterine or ovarian cancer and 
both have a reduced risk of mammary cancer despite widespread concern about the welfare of freeroaming cats the 
lifespans of neutered feral cats in managed colonies compare favourably with those of pet cats neutered cats in managed 
colonies can also live long lives diseases cats can suffer from a wide range of health problems including infectious 
diseases parasites injuries and chronic disease vaccinations are available for many of these diseases and domestic cats 
are regularly given treatments to eliminate parasites such as worms and fleas poisoning in addition to obvious dangers 
such as rodenticides insecticides and herbicides cats may be poisoned by many chemicals usually considered safe by their 
human guardians because their livers are less effective at some forms of detoxification than those of many other animals 
including humans and dogs some of the most common causes of poisoning in cats are antifreeze and rodent baits cats may 
be particularly sensitive to environmental pollutants when a cat has a sudden or prolonged serious illness without any 
obvious cause it has possibly been exposed to a toxin many human medicines should never be given to cats for example the 
painkiller paracetamol or acetaminophen sold as tylenol and panadol is extremely toxic to cats even very small doses 
need immediate treatment and can be fatal even aspirin which is sometimes used to treat arthritis in cats is much more 
toxic to them than to humans and must be administered cautiously similarly application of minoxidil rogaine to the skin 
of cats either accidentally or by wellmeaning guardians attempting to counter loss of fur has sometimes been fatal 
essential oils can be toxic to cats and cases have been reported of serious illnesses caused by tea tree oil including 
flea treatments and shampoos containing it other common household substances that should be used with caution around 
cats include mothballs and other naphthalene products phenolbased products eg pinesol dettol lysol or hexachlorophene 
are often used for cleaning and disinfecting near cats feeding areas or litter boxes but these can sometimes be fatal 
ethylene glycol often used as an automotive antifreeze is particularly appealing to cats and as little as a teaspoonful 
can be fatal some human foods are toxic to cats for example chocolate can cause theobromine poisoning although unlike 
dogs few cats will eat chocolate large amounts of onions or garlic are also poisonous to cats many houseplants are also 
dangerous such as philodendron species and the leaves of the easter lily lilium longiflorum which can cause permanent 
and lifethreatening kidney damage behavior freeranging cats are active both day and night although they tend to be 
slightly more active at night the timing of cats activity is quite flexible and varied which means house cats may be 
more active in the morning and evening crepuscular behavior as a response to greater human activity at these times 
although they spend the majority of their time in the vicinity of their home housecats can range many hundreds of meters 
from this central point and are known to establish territories that vary considerably in size in one study ranging from 
to hectares acres cats conserve energy by sleeping more than most animals especially as they grow older the daily 
duration of sleep varies usually hours with being the average some cats can sleep as much as hours in a hour period the 
term cat nap for a short rest refers to the cats tendency to fall asleep lightly for a brief period while asleep cats 
experience short periods of rapid eye movement sleep often accompanied by muscle twitches which suggests they are 
dreaming sociability although wildcats are solitary the social behavior of domestic cats is much more variable and 
ranges from widely dispersed individuals to feral cat colonies that form around a food source based on groups of 
cooperating females within such groups one cat is usually dominant over the others each cat in a colony holds a distinct 
territory with sexually active males having the largest territories which are about times larger than those of female 
cats and may overlap with several females territories these territories are marked by urine spraying by rubbing objects 
at head height with secretions from facial glands and by defecation between these territories are neutral areas where 
cats watch and greet one another without territorial conflicts outside these neutral areas territory holders usually 
chase away stranger cats at first by staring hissing and growling and if that does not work by short but noisy and 
violent attacks despite some cats cohabiting in colonies they do not have a social survival strategy or a pack mentality 
and always hunt alone domestic cats use many vocalizations for communication including purring trilling hissing 
growlingsnarling grunting and several different forms of meowing by contrast feral cats are generally silent their types 
of body language including position of ears and tail relaxation of whole body and kneading of paws are all indicators of 
mood the tail and ears are particularly important social signal mechanisms in cats eg with a raised tail acting as a 
friendly greeting and flattened ears indicating hostility tailraising also indicates the cats position in the groups 
social hierarchy with dominant individuals raising their tails less often than subordinate animals nosetonose touching 
is also a common greeting and may be followed by social grooming which is solicited by one of the cats raising and 
tilting its head however some pet cats are poorly socialized in particular older cats may show aggressiveness towards 
newly arrived kittens which may include biting and scratching this type of behavior is known as feline asocial 
aggression though cats and dogs are believed to be natural enemies they can live together if correctly socialized for 
cats life in proximity to humans and other animals kept by them amounts to a symbiotic social adaptation they may 
express great affection towards their human and even other companions especially if they psychologically imprint on them 
at a very young age and are treated with consistent affection ethologically the human keeper of a cat may function as a 
sort of surrogate for the cats mother and adult housecats live their lives in a kind of extended kittenhood a form of 
behavioral neoteny the highpitched sounds housecats make to solicit food may mimic the cries of a hungry human infant 
making them particularly hard for humans to ignore grooming cats are known for spending considerable amounts of time 
licking their coat to keep it clean the cats tongue has backwardsfacing spines about m long which are called papillae 
these contain keratin which makes them quite rigid so the papillae act like a hairbrush some cats particularly 
longhaired cats occasionally regurgitate hairballs of fur that have collected in their stomachs from grooming these 
clumps of fur are usually sausageshaped and about cm long hairballs can be prevented with remedies that ease elimination 
of the hair through the gut as well as regular grooming of the coat with a comb or stiff brush some cats can develop a 
compulsive behavior known as psychogenic alopecia or excessive grooming fighting among domestic cats males are more 
likely to fight than females among feral cats the most common reason for cat fighting is competition between two males 
to mate with a female in such cases most fights are won by the heavier male another common reason for fighting in 
domestic cats is the difficulty of establishing territories within a small home female cats also fight over territory or 
to defend their kittens neutering will decrease or eliminate this behavior in many cases suggesting that the behavior is 
linked to sex hormones when cats become aggressive they try to make themselves appear larger and more threatening by 
raising their fur arching their backs turning sideways and hissing or spitting often the ears are pointed down and back 
to avoid damage to the inner ear and potentially listen for any changes behind them while focused forward they may also 
vocalize loudly and bare their teeth in an effort to further intimidate their opponent fights usually consist of 
grappling and delivering powerful slaps to the face and body with the forepaws as well as bites cats also throw 
themselves to the ground in a defensive posture to rake their opponents belly with their powerful hind legs serious 
damage is rare as the fights are usually short in duration with the loser running away with little more than a few 
scratches to the face and ears however fights for mating rights are typically more severe and injuries may include deep 
puncture wounds and lacerations normally serious injuries from fighting are limited to infections of scratches and bites 
though these can occasionally kill cats if untreated in addition bites are probably the main route of transmission of 
feline immunodeficiency virus sexually active males are usually involved in many fights during their lives and often 
have decidedly battered faces with obvious scars and cuts to their ears and noses hunting and feeding cats hunt small 
prey primarily birds and rodents and are often used as a form of pest control domestic cats are a major predator of 
wildlife in the united states killing an estimated billion birds and billion mammals annually the bulk of predation in 
the united states is done by million feral and stray cats effective measures to reduce this population are elusive 
meeting opposition from cat enthusiasts in the case of freeranging pets equipping cats with bells and not letting them 
out at night will reduce wildlife predation cats wearing one type of device killed times fewer birds than uncollared 
cats freefed feral cats and house cats tend to consume many small meals in a single day although the frequency and size 
of meals varies between individuals cats use two hunting strategies either stalking prey actively or waiting in ambush 
until an animal comes close enough to be captured although it is not certain the strategy used may depend on the prey 
species in the area with cats waiting in ambush outside burrows but tending to actively stalk birds most breeds of cat 
have a noted fondness for settling in high places or perching in the wild a higher place may serve as a concealed site 
from which to hunt domestic cats may strike prey by pouncing from a perch such as a tree branch as does a leopard 
another possible explanations is that height gives the cat a better observation point allowing it to survey its 
territory during a fall from a high place a cat can reflexively twist its body and right itself using its acute sense of 
balance and flexibility this is known as the cat righting reflex an individual cat always rights itself in the same way 
provided it has the time to do so during a fall the height required for this to occur is around cm ft cats without a 
tail eg manx cats also have this ability since a cat mostly moves its hind legs and relies on conservation of angular 
momentum to set up for landing and the tail is little used for this feat this leads to the proverb a cat always lands on 
its feet the perhaps best known element of cats hunting behavior which is commonly misunderstood and often appalls cat 
owners because it looks like torture is that cats often appear to play with prey by releasing it after capture this 
behavior is due to an instinctive imperative to ensure that the prey is weak enough to be killed without endangering the 
cat this behavior is referred to in the idiom catandmouse game or simply cat and mouse another poorly understood element 
of cat hunting behavior is the presentation of prey to human guardians ethologist paul leyhausen proposed that cats 
adopt humans into their social group and share excess kill with others in the group according to the dominance hierarchy 
in which humans are reacted to as if they are at or near the top anthropologist and zoologist desmond morris in his book 
catwatching suggests when cats bring home mice or birds they are attempting to teach their human to hunt or trying to 
help their human as if feeding an elderly cat or an inept kitten morriss theory is inconsistent with the fact that male 
cats also bring home prey despite males having no involvement with raising kittens domestic cats select food based on 
its temperature smell and texture strongly disliking chilled foods and responding most strongly to moist foods rich in 
amino acids which are similar to meat cats may reject novel flavors a response termed neophobia and learn quickly to 
avoid foods that have tasted unpleasant in the past they may also avoid sugary foods and milk since they are lactose 
intolerant these sugars are not easily digested and may cause soft stools or diarrhea they can also develop odd eating 
habits some cats like to eat or chew on other things most commonly wool but also plastic paper string aluminum 
foilchristmas tree tinsel or even coal this condition pica can threaten their health depending on the amount and 
toxicity of the items eaten though cats usually prey on animals more than half their size a feral cat in australia had 
been photographed to kill an adult pademelon weighing around the cats size at kg lb since cats cannot fully close their 
lips around something to create suction they use a lapping method with the tongue to draw liquid upwards into their 
mouths lapping at a rate of four times a second the cat touches the smooth tip of its tongue to the surface of the water 
and quickly retracts it drawing water upwards play domestic cats especially young kittens are known for their love of 
play this behavior mimics hunting and is important in helping kittens learn to stalk capture and kill prey cats also 
engage in play fighting with each other and with humans this behavior may be a way for cats to practice the skills 
needed for real combat and might also reduce any fear they associate with launching attacks on other animals owing to 
the close similarity between play and hunting cats prefer to play with objects that resemble prey such as small furry 
toys that move rapidly but rapidly lose interest they become habituated in a toy they have played with before cats also 
tend to play with toys more when they are hungry string is often used as a toy but if it is eaten it can become caught 
at the base of the cats tongue and then move into the intestines a medical emergency which can cause serious illness 
even death owing to the risks posed by cats eating string it is sometimes replaced with a laser pointers dot which cats 
may chase while concerns have been raised about the safety of playing with lasers john marshall an ophthalmologist at st 
thomas hospital has stated it would be virtually impossible to blind a cat with a laser pointer reproduction female cats 
are seasonally polyestrous which means they may have many periods of heat over the course of a year the season beginning 
in spring and ending in late autumn heat periods occur about every two weeks and last about to days multiple males will 
be attracted to a female in heat the males will fight over her and the victor wins the right to mate at first the female 
rejects the male but eventually the female allows the male to mate the female utters a loud yowl as the male pulls out 
of her because a male cats penis has a band of about backwardspointing penile spines which are about mm long upon 
withdrawal of the penis the spines rake the walls of the females vagina which is a trigger for ovulation this act also 
occurs to clear the vagina of other sperm in the context of a second or more mating thus giving the later males a larger 
chance of conception after mating the female washes her vulva thoroughly if a male attempts to mate with her at this 
point the female will attack him after about to minutes once the female is finished grooming the cycle will repeat 
because ovulation is not always triggered by a single mating females may not be impregnated by the first male with which 
they mate furthermore cats are superfecund that is a female may mate with more than one male when she is in heat with 
the result that different kittens in a litter may have different fathers at hours after conception the morula forms at 
hours early blastocysts form at days implantation occurs the gestation period for cats is between and days with an 
average of days the size of a litter usually is three to five kittens with the first litter usually smaller than 
subsequent litters kittens are weaned between six and seven weeks old and cats normally reach sexual maturity at months 
females and to months males although this can vary depending on breed females can have two to three litters per year so 
may produce up to kittens in their breeding span of around ten years cats are ready to go to new homes at about weeks of 
age when they are ready to leave their mother they can be surgically sterilized spayed or castrated as early as weeks to 
limit unwanted reproduction this surgery also prevents undesirable sexrelated behavior such as aggression territory 
marking spraying urine in males and yowling calling in females traditionally this surgery was performed at around six to 
nine months of age but it is increasingly being performed prior to puberty at about three to six months in the us about 
of household cats are neutered vocalizations the cat is a very vocal animal known for its trademark purring it also 
produces a wide variety of other sounds the mechanism by which cats purr is elusive the cat has no unique anatomical 
feature that is clearly responsible for the sound it was until recent times believed that only the cats of the felis 
genus could purr however felids of the panthera genus tiger lion jaguar and leopard also produce sounds similar to 
purring but only when exhaling ecology habitats cats are a cosmopolitan species and are found across much of the world 
geneticist stephen james obrien of the national cancer institute in frederick maryland remarked on how successful cats 
have been in evolutionary terms cats are one of evolutions most charismatic creatures they can live on the highest 
mountains and in the hottest deserts they are extremely adaptable and are now present on all continents except 
antarctica and on of the main groups of islandseven on subantarctic islands such as the kerguelen islands feral cats can 
live in forests grasslands tundra coastal areas agricultural land scrublands urban areas and wetlands their habitats 
even include small oceanic islands with no human inhabitants further the close relatives of domestic cats the african 
wildcat felis silvestris lybica and the arabian sand cat felis margarita both inhabit desert environments and domestic 
cats still show similar adaptations and behaviors the cats ability to thrive in almost any terrestrial habitat has led 
to its designation as one of the worlds worst invasive species as domestic cats are little altered from wildcats they 
can readily interbreed this hybridization poses a danger to the genetic distinctiveness of some wildcat populations 
particularly in scotland and hungary and possibly also the iberian peninsula feral cats feral cats are domestic cats 
that were born in or have reverted to a wild state they are unfamiliar with and wary of humans and roam freely in urban 
and rural areas the numbers of feral cats is not known but estimates of the us feral population range from to million 
feral cats may live alone but most are found in large colonies which occupy a specific territory and are usually 
associated with a source of food famous feral cat colonies are found in rome around the colosseum and forum romanum with 
cats at some of these sites being fed and given medical attention by volunteers public attitudes towards feral cats vary 
widely ranging from seeing them as freeranging pets to regarding them as vermin one common approach to reducing the 
feral cat population is termed trapneuterreturn where the cats are trapped neutered immunized against rabies and the 
feline leukemia virus and then released before releasing them back into their feral colonies the attending veterinarian 
often nips the tip off one ear to mark it as neutered and inoculated since these cats may be trapped again volunteers 
continue to feed and give care to these cats throughout their lives given this support their lifespans are increased and 
behavior and nuisance problems caused by competition for food are reduced impact on prey species to date few scientific 
data are available to assess the impact of cat predation on prey populations even wellfed domestic cats may hunt and 
kill mainly catching small mammals but also birds amphibians reptiles fish and invertebrates hunting by domestic cats 
may be contributing to the decline in the numbers of birds in urban areas although the importance of this effect remains 
controversial in the wild the introduction of feral cats during human settlement can threaten native species with 
extinction in many cases controlling or eliminating the populations of nonnative cats can produce a rapid recovery in 
native animals however the ecological role of introduced cats can be more complicated for example cats can control the 
numbers of rats which also prey on birds eggs and young so a cat population can protect an endangered bird species by 
suppressing mesopredators in the southern hemisphere cats are a particular problem in landmasses such as australasia 
where cat species have never been native and few equivalent native mediumsized mammalian predators occurred native 
species such as the new zealand kakapo and the australian bettong for example tend to be more ecologically vulnerable 
and behaviorally naive to predation by feral cats feral cats have had a major impact on these native species and have 
played a leading role in the endangerment and extinction of many animals cat numbers in the uk are growing and their 
abundance is far above the natural carrying capacity because their population sizes are independent of their preys 
dynamics ie cats are recreational hunters with other food sources population densities can be as high as individuals per 
km and the trend is an increase of million cats annually impact on birds the domestic cat is probably a significant 
predator of birds uk assessments indicate they may be accountable for an estimated million bird deaths each year certain 
species appear more susceptible than others for example of house sparrow mortality is linked to the domestic cat in the 
recovery of ringed robins erithacus rubecula and dunnocks prunella modularis of deaths were a result of cat predation 
the presence of larger carnivores such as coyotes which prey on cats and other small predators reduces the effect of 
predation by cats and other small predators such as opossums and raccoons on bird numbers and variety the proposal that 
cat populations will increase when the numbers of these top predators decline is called the mesopredator release 
hypothesis however a new study suggests cats are a much greater menace than previously thought and feral cats kill 
several billion birds each year in the united states on islands birds can contribute as much as of a cats diet in nearly 
all cases however the cat cannot be identified as the sole cause for reducing the numbers of island birds and in some 
instances eradication of cats has caused a mesopredator release effect where the suppression of top carnivores creates 
an abundance of smaller predators that cause a severe decline in their shared prey domestic cats are however known to be 
a contributing factor to the decline of many species a factor that has ultimately led in some cases to extinction the 
south island piopio chatham islands rail the auckland islands merganser and the common diving petrel are a few from a 
long list with the most extreme case being the flightless stephens island wren which was driven to extinction only a few 
years after its discovery some of the same factors that have promoted adaptive radiation of island avifauna over 
evolutionary time appear to promote vulnerability to nonnative species in modern time the susceptibility of many island 
birds is undoubtedly due to evolution in the absence of mainland predators competitors diseases and parasites in 
addition to lower reproductive rates and extended incubation periods the loss of flight or reduced flying ability is 
also characteristic of many island endemics these biological aspects have increased vulnerability to extinction in the 
presence of introduced species such as the domestic cat equally behavioral traits exhibited by island species such as 
predatory naivety and groundnesting have also contributed to their susceptibility cats and humans cats are common pets 
in europe and north america and their worldwide population exceeds million although cat guardianship has commonly been 
associated with women a gallup poll reported that men and women were equally likely to own a cat according to the humane 
society of the united states as well as being kept as pets cats are also used in the international fur trade for making 
coats gloves hats shoes blankets and stuffed toys about cats are needed to make a cat fur coat this use has now been 
outlawed in the united states australia and the european union however some cat furs are still made into blankets in 
switzerland as folk remedies believed to help rheumatism a few attempts to build a cat census have been made over the 
years both through associations or national and international organizations such as the canadian federation of humane 
societiess one and over the net but such a task does not seem simple to achieve general estimates for the global 
population of domestic cats range widely from anywhere between million to million history and mythology traditionally 
historians tended to think ancient egypt was the site of cat domestication owing to the clear depictions of house cats 
in egyptian paintings about years old however in a neolithic grave excavated in shillourokambos cyprus contained the 
skeletons laid close to one another of both a human and a cat the grave is estimated to be years old pushing back the 
earliest known felinehuman association significantly the cat specimen is large and closely resembles the african wildcat 
f s lybica rather than presentday domestic cats this discovery combined with genetic studies suggests cats were probably 
domesticated in the middle east in the fertile crescent around the time of the development of agriculture and then they 
were brought to cyprus and egypt direct evidence for the domestication of cats years ago in quanhucun in china has been 
published the cats are believed to have been attracted to the village by rodents which in turn were attracted by grain 
cultivated and stored by humans in ancient egypt cats were sacred animals with the goddess bastet often depicted in cat 
form sometimes taking on the warlike aspect of a lioness the romans are often credited with introducing the domestic cat 
from egypt to europe in roman aquitaine a first or secondcentury epitaph of a young girl holding a cat is one of two 
earliest depictions of the roman domesticated cat however cats possibly were already kept in europe prior to the roman 
empire as they may have been present in britain in the late iron age domestic cats were spread throughout much of the 
rest of the world during the age of discovery as they were carried on sailing ships to control shipboard rodents and as 
goodluck charms several ancient religions believed cats are exalted souls companions or guides for humans that are 
allknowing but mute so they cannot influence decisions made by humans in japan the maneki neko cat is a symbol of good 
fortune although no species are sacred in islam cats are revered by muslims some western writers have stated muhammad 
had a favorite cat muezza he is reported to have loved cats so much he would do without his cloak rather than disturb 
one that was sleeping on it the story has no origin in early muslim writers and seems to confuse a story of a later sufi 
saint ahmed arrifai centuries after muhammad freyja the goddess of love beauty and fertility in norse mythology is 
depicted as riding a chariot drawn by cats many cultures have negative superstitions about cats an example would be the 
belief that a black cat crossing ones path leads to bad luck or that cats are witches familiars used to augment a witchs 
powers and skills the killing of cats in medieval ypres belgium is commemorated in the innocuous presentday kattenstoet 
cat parade according to a myth in many cultures cats have multiple lives in many countries they are believed to have 
nine lives but in italy germany greece and some spanishspeaking regions they are said to have seven lives while in 
turkish and arabic traditions the number of lives is six the myth is attributed to the natural suppleness and swiftness 
cats exhibit to escape lifethreatening situations also lending credence to this myth is the fact that falling cats often 
land on their feet using an instinctive righting reflex to twist their bodies around nonetheless cats can still be 
injured or killed by a high fall see also cats by location cats in ancient egypt cats in australia cats in new zealand 
cats in the united states references external links the dictionary definition of kitty at wiktionary data related to cat 
at wikispecies media related to cat at wikimedia commons animal care at wikibooks quotations related to cat at wikiquote 
cat domestic the encyclopedia americana highresolution images of the cat brain biodiversity heritage library 
bibliography for felis catus catpert the cat expert cat articles view the cat genome in ensembl