
cattlecolloquially cowsare the most common type of large domesticated ungulates they are a prominent modern member of 
the subfamily bovinae are the most widespread species of the genus bos and are most commonly classified collectively as 
bos taurus cattle are raised as livestock for meat beef and veal as dairy animals for milk and other dairy products and 
as draft animals oxen or bullocks pulling carts plows and other implements other products include leather and dung for 
manure or fuel in some regions such as parts of india cattle have significant religious meaning from as few as 
progenitors domesticated in southeast turkey about years ago according to an estimate from there are billion cattle in 
the world in cattle became the first livestock animal to have a fully mapped genome species cattle were originally 
identified as three separate species bos taurus the european or taurine cattle including similar types from africa and 
asia bos indicus the zebu and the extinct bos primigenius the aurochs the aurochs is ancestral to both zebu and taurine 
cattle now these have been reclassified as one species with bos taurus primigenius and bos taurus indicus complicating 
the matter is the ability of cattle to interbreed with other closely related species hybrid individuals and even breeds 
exist not only between taurine cattle and zebu such as the sanga cattle bos taurus africanus but also between one or 
both of these and some other members of the genus bos yaks the dzo or yattle banteng and gaur hybrids such as the 
beefalo breed can even occur between taurine cattle and either species of bison leading some authors to consider them 
part of the genus bos as well the hybrid origin of some types may not be obvious for example genetic testing of the 
dwarf lulu breed the only taurinetype cattle in nepal found them to be a mix of taurine cattle zebu and yak however 
cattle cannot successfully be hybridized with more distantly related bovines such as water buffalo or african buffalo 
the aurochs originally ranged throughout europe north africa and much of asia in historical times its range became 
restricted to europe and the last known individual died in masovia poland in about breeders have attempted to recreate 
cattle of similar appearance to aurochs by crossing traditional types of domesticated cattle creating the heck cattle 
breed etymology cattle did not originate as the term for bovine animals it was borrowed from anglonorman catel itself 
from medieval latin capitale principal sum of money capital itself derived in turn from latin caput head cattle 
originally meant movable personal property especially livestock of any kind as opposed to real property the land which 
also included wild or small freeroaming animals such as chickens they were sold as part of the land the word is a 
variant of chattel a unit of personal property and closely related to capital in the economic sense the term replaced 
earlier old english feoh cattle property which survives today as fee cf german vieh dutch vee gothic faihu the word cow 
came via anglosaxon c plural c from common indoeuropean gus genitive gows a bovine animal compare persian gv sanskrit go 
welsh buwch the plural c became ki or kie in middle english and an additional plural ending was often added giving kine 
kien but also kies kuin and others this is the origin of the now archaic english plural of kine the scots language 
singular is coo or cou and the plural is kye in older english sources such as the king james version of the bible cattle 
refers to livestock as opposed to deer which refers to wildlife wild cattle may refer to feral cattle or to 
undomesticated species of the genus bos today when used without any other qualifier the modern meaning of cattle is 
usually restricted to domesticated bovines terminology in general the same words are used in different parts of the 
world but with minor differences in the definitions the terminology described here contrasts the differences in 
definition between the united kingdom and other britishinfluenced parts of world such as canada australia new zealand 
ireland and the united states an intact ie not castrated adult male is called a bull a wild young unmarked bull is known 
as a micky in australia an unbranded bovine of either sex is called a maverick in the usa and canada an adult female 
that has had a calf or two depending on regional usage is a cow a young female before she has had a calf of her own and 
is under three years of age is called a heifer hfr hefr a young female that has had only one calf is occasionally called 
a firstcalf heifer young cattle of both sexes are called calves until they are weaned then weaners until they are a year 
old in some areas in other areas particularly with male beef cattle they may be known as feeder calves or simply feeders 
after that they are referred to as yearlings or stirks if between one and two years of age a castrated male is called a 
steer in the united states older steers are often called bullocks in other parts of the world but in north america this 
term refers to a young bull piker bullocks are micky bulls uncastrated young male bulls that were caught castrated and 
then later lost in australia the term japanese ox is used for grainfed steers in the weight range of to kg that are 
destined for the japanese meat trade in north america draft cattle under four years old are called working steers 
improper or late castration on a bull results in it becoming a coarse steer known as a stag in australia canada and new 
zealand in some countries an incompletely castrated male is known also as a rig a castrated male occasionally a female 
or in some areas a bull kept for draft purposes is called an ox plural oxen ox may also be used to refer to some carcass 
products from any adult cattle such as oxhide oxblood oxtail or oxliver a springer is a cow or heifer close to calving 
in all cattle species a female twin of a bull usually becomes an infertile partial intersex and is called a freemartin 
neat horned oxen from which neatsfoot oil is derived beef young ox and beefing young animal fit for slaughtering are 
obsolete terms although poll pollard or polled cattle are still terms in use for naturally hornless animals or in some 
areas also for those that have been disbudded or dehorned cattle raised for human consumption are called beef cattle 
within the american beef cattle industry the older term beef plural beeves is still used to refer to an animal of either 
sex some australian canadian new zealand and british people use the term beast especially for single animals when the 
sex is unknown cattle bred specifically for milk production are called milking or dairy cattle a cow kept to provide 
milk for one family may be called a house cow or milker a fresh cow is a dairy term for a cow or firstcalf heifer who 
has recently given birth or freshened the adjective applying to cattle in general is usually bovine the terms bull cow 
and calf are also used by extension to denote the sex or age of other large animals including whales hippopotamuses 
camels elk and elephants singular terminology issue cattle can only be used in the plural and not in the singular it is 
a plurale tantum thus one may refer to three cattle or some cattle but not one cattle no universally used singular form 
in modern english of cattle exists other than the sex and agespecific terms such as cow bull steer and heifer 
historically ox was not a sexspecific term for adult cattle but generally this is now used only for draft cattle 
especially adult castrated males the term is also incorporated into the names of other species such as the musk ox and 
grunting ox yak and is used in some areas to describe certain cattle products such as oxhide and oxtail cow is in 
general use as a singular for the collective cattle despite the objections by those who insist it to be a femalespecific 
term although the phrase that cow is a bull is absurd from a lexicographic standpoint the word cow is easy to use when a 
singular is needed and the sex is unknown or irrelevant when there is a cow in the road for example further any herd of 
fully mature cattle in or near a pasture is statistically likely to consist mostly of cows so the term is probably 
accurate even in the restrictive sense other than the few bulls needed for breeding the vast majority of male cattle are 
castrated as calves and slaughtered for meat before the age of three years thus in a pastured herd any calves or herd 
bulls usually are clearly distinguishable from the cows due to distinctively different sizes and clear anatomical 
differences merriamwebster a us dictionary recognizes the sexnonspecific use of cow as an alternate definition whereas 
collins a uk dictionary does not colloquially more general nonspecific terms may denote cattle when a singular form is 
needed australian new zealand and british farmers use the term beast or cattle beast bovine is also used in britain the 
term critter is common in the western united states and canada particularly when referring to young cattle in some areas 
of the american south particularly the appalachian region where both dairy and beef cattle are present an individual 
animal was once called a beef critter though that term is becoming archaic other terminology cattle raised for human 
consumption are called beef cattle within the beef cattle industry in parts of the united states the term beef plural 
beeves is still used in its archaic sense to refer to an animal of either sex cows of certain breeds that are kept for 
the milk they give are called dairy cows or milking cows formerly milch cows most young male offspring of dairy cows are 
sold for veal and may be referred to as veal calves the term dogies is used to describe orphaned calves in the context 
of ranch work in the american west as in keep them dogies moving in some places a cow kept to provide milk for one 
family is called a house cow other obsolete terms for cattle include neat this use survives in neatsfoot oil extracted 
from the feet and legs of cattle and beefing young animal fit for slaughter an onomatopoeic term for one of the most 
common sounds made by cattle is moo also called lowing there are a number of other sounds made by cattle including 
calves bawling and bulls bellowing the bullroarer makes a sound similar to a bulls territorial call anatomy cattle are 
large quadrupedal ungulate mammals with cloven hooves most breeds have horns which can be as large as the texas longhorn 
or small like a scur careful genetic selection has allowed polled hornless cattle to become widespread cattle are 
ruminants meaning their digestive system is highly specialized to allow the use of poorly digestible plants as food 
cattle have one stomach with four compartments the rumen reticulum omasum and abomasum with the rumen being the largest 
compartment cattle are known for regurgitating and rechewing their food known as cud chewing the reticulum the smallest 
compartment is known as the honeycomb cattle sometimes consume metal objects which are deposited in the reticulum and 
irritation from the metal objects causes hardware disease the omasums main function is to absorb water and nutrients 
from the digestible feed the omasum is known as the many plies the abomasum is like the human stomach this is why it is 
known as the true stomach the cud is then reswallowed and further digested by specialized microorganisms in the rumen 
these microbes are primarily responsible for decomposing cellulose and other carbohydrates into volatile fatty acids 
cattle use as their primary metabolic fuel the microbes inside the rumen also synthesize amino acids from nonprotein 
nitrogenous sources such as urea and ammonia as these microbes reproduce in the rumen older generations die and their 
cells continue on through the digestive tract these cells are then partially digested in the small intestines allowing 
cattle to gain a highquality protein source these features allow cattle to thrive on grasses and other vegetation 
gestation and size the gestation period for a cow is about nine months long a newborn calfs size can vary among breeds 
but a typical calf typically weighs to kg to lb adult size and weight vary significantly among breeds and sex the world 
record for the heaviest bull was kg lb a chianina named donetto when he was exhibited at the arezzo show in the heaviest 
steer was eightyearold old ben a shorthornhereford cross weighing in at kg lb in steers are generally killed before 
reaching kg lb breeding stock may be allowed a longer lifespan occasionally living as long as years the oldest recorded 
cow big bertha died at the age of in sight a common misconception about cattle particularly bulls is that they are 
enraged by the color red something provocative is often said to be like a red flag to a bull this is incorrect as cattle 
are redgreen colorblind the myth arose from the use of red capes in bullfighting in fact two different capes are used 
the capote is a large flowing magenta and yellow cape the more famous muleta is the smaller red cape used exclusively 
for the final fatal segment of the fight it is not the color of the cape that angers the bull but rather the movement of 
the fabric that irritates the bull and incites it to charge having two kinds of color receptors in the cone cells in 
their retinas cattle are dichromatic as are most other nonprimate land mammals udder a cows udder contains two pairs of 
mammary glands creating four quarters male genitalia bulls become fertile at about seven months of age their fertility 
is closely related to the size of their testicles and one simple test of fertility is to measure the circumference of 
the scrotum a young bull is likely to be fertile once this reaches centimetres in that of a fully adult bull may be over 
centimetres in bulls have a fibroelastic penis given the small amount of erectile tissue there is little enlargement 
after erection the penis is quite rigid when nonerect and becomes even more rigid during erection protrusion is not 
affected much by erection but more by relaxation of the retractor penis muscle and straightening of the sigmoid flexure 
weight adult weights of cattle always depend on the breed smaller kinds such as dexter and jersey adults range between 
to kg to lb large continental breeds such as charolais marchigiana belgian blue and chianina adults range up to to kg to 
lb britishbreeds such as hereford angus and shorthorn mature between to kg to lb occasionally higher particularly with 
angus and hereford bulls will be a bit larger than cows of the same breed by a few hundred kilograms chianina bulls can 
weigh up to kg lb british bulls such as angus and hereford can weigh as little as kg lb to as much as kg lb it is 
difficult to generalize or average out the weight of all cattle because different kinds have different averages of 
weights however according to some sources the average weight of all cattle is kg lb finishing steers in the feedlot 
average about kg lb cows about kg lb and bulls about kg lb in the united states the average weights of beef cattle have 
steadily increased especially since the s requiring the building of new slaughterhouses able to handle larger carcasses 
new packing plants in the s stimulated a large increase in cattle weights before beef cattle averaged only kg lb net and 
thereafter weights climbed steadily cattle genome in the april edition of the journal science a team of researchers led 
by the national institutes of health and the us department of agriculture reported having mapped the bovine genome the 
scientists found cattle have about genes and of their genes are shared with humans and they share about genes with dogs 
and rodents but are not found in humans using this bovine hapmap researchers can track the differences between the 
breeds that affect the quality of meat and milk yields domestication and husbandry cattle occupy a unique role in human 
history domesticated since at least the early neolithic geneticists and anthropologists used to suspect that years ago 
africans domesticated local cattle a study was done by university of missouri researchers reported that ancient 
domesticated african cattle originated from multiple regions in the middleeast and india a study on breeds showed that 
todays cattle originates from africa asia north and south america australia and europe according to mctavish et some 
researchers have suggested that african taurine cattle are derived from a third independent domestication from north 
african aurochsen other modern genetic research suggests the entire modern domestic stock may have arisen from as few as 
aurochs tamed in the upper reaches of mesopotamia about years ago near the villages of ayn tepesi in southeastern turkey 
and djade elmughara in northern iraq they are raised for meat beef cattle dairy products and hides they are also used as 
draft animals and in certain sports some consider cattle the oldest form of wealth and cattle raiding consequently one 
of the earliest forms of theft cattle are often raised by allowing herds to graze on the grasses of large tracts of 
rangeland raising cattle in this manner allows the use of land that might be unsuitable for growing crops the most 
common interactions with cattle involve daily feeding cleaning and milking many routine husbandry practices involve ear 
tagging dehorning loading medical operations vaccinations and hoof care as well as training for agricultural shows and 
preparations also some cultural differences occur in working with cattle the cattle husbandry of fulani men rests on 
behavioural techniques whereas in europe cattle are controlled primarily by physical means such as fences breeders use 
cattle husbandry to reduce m bovis infection susceptibility by selective breeding and maintaining herd health to avoid 
concurrent disease cattle are farmed for beef veal dairy and leather and they are less commonly used for conservation 
grazing simply to maintain grassland for wildlife for example in epping forest england they are often used in some of 
the most wild places for livestock depending on the breed cattle can survive on hill grazing heaths marshes moors and 
semidesert modern cattle are more commercial than older breeds and having become more specialized are less versatile for 
this reason many smaller farmers still favor old breeds such as the jersey dairy breed in portugal spain southern france 
and some latin american countries bulls are used in the activity of bullfighting jallikattu in india is a bull taming 
sport radically different from european bullfighting humans are unarmed and bulls are not killed in many other countries 
bullfighting is illegal other activities such as bull riding are seen as part of a rodeo especially in north america 
bullleaping a central ritual in bronze age minoan culture see bull mythology still exists in southwestern france in 
modern times cattle are also entered into agricultural competitions these competitions can involve live cattle or cattle 
carcases in hoof and hook events in terms of food intake by humans consumption of cattle is less efficient than of grain 
or vegetables with regard to land use and hence cattle grazing consumes more area than such other agricultural 
production when raised on grains nonetheless cattle and other forms of domesticated animals can sometimes help to use 
plant resources in areas not easily amenable to other forms of agriculture sleep the average sleep time of a domestic 
cow is about four hours a day economy the meat of adult cattle is known as beef and that of calves is veal other animal 
parts are also used as food products including blood liver kidney heart and oxtail cattle also produce milk and dairy 
cattle are specifically bred to produce the large quantities of milk processed and sold for human consumption cattle 
today are the basis of a multibillion dollar industry worldwide the international trade in beef for was over billion and 
represented only of world beef production the production of milk which is also made into cheese butter yogurt and other 
dairy products is comparable in economic size to beef production and provides an important part of the food supply for 
many of the worlds people cattle hides used for leather to make shoes couches and clothing are another widespread 
product cattle remain broadly used as draft animals in many developing countries such as india cattle meat production 
source helgi library world bank faostat about half the worlds meat comes from cattle feral cattle feral populations of 
the cattle are known from australia the united states colombia argentina spain france and many islands including new 
guinea hawaii galapagos juan fernndez islands hispaniola dominican republic and haiti tristan da cunha and le amsterdam 
environmental impact a report from the food and agriculture organization fao states that the livestock sector is 
responsible for of greenhouse gas emissions the report concludes unless changes are made the damage thought to be linked 
to livestock may more than double by as demand for meat increases another concern is manure which if not wellmanaged can 
lead to adverse environmental consequences however manure also is a valuable source of nutrients and organic matter when 
used as a fertilizer manure was used as a fertilizer on about million acres of us cropland in with manure from cattle 
accounting for nearly of manure applications to soybeans and about or more of manure applications to corn wheat barley 
oats and sorghum substitution of manure for synthetic fertilizers in crop production can be environmentally significant 
as between and megajoules of fossil fuel energy would be used per kg of nitrogen in manufacture of synthetic nitrogenous 
fertilizers one of the cited changes suggested to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is intensification of the livestock 
industry since intensification leads to less land for a given level of production this assertion is supported by studies 
of the us beef production system suggesting practices prevailing in involved less fossil fuel use less greenhouse gas 
emissions less water use and less land use per unit mass of beef produced than those used in however these numbers 
included not only feedlots but also feed production foragebased cowcalf operations backgrounding before cattle enter a 
feedlot and animals culled from the dairy industry the number of american cattle kept in confined feedlot conditions 
fluctuates from january through january there was no significant overall upward or downward trend in the number of us 
cattle on feed for slaughter which averaged about million head over that period previously the number had increased it 
was million in cattle on feed for slaughter numbered about million on january ie about of the estimated inventory of 
million us cattle including calves on that date of the million us cattle on feed for slaughter in operations with head 
or more were estimated to number million cattle feedlots in this size category correspond to the regulatory definition 
of large concentrated animal feeding operations cafos for cattle other than mature dairy cows or veal calves significant 
numbers of dairy as well as beef cattle are confined in cafos defined as new and existing operations which stable or 
confine and feed or maintain for a total of days or more in any month period more than the number of animals specified 
where crops vegetation forage growth or postharvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any 
portion of the lot or facility they may be designated as small medium and large such designation of cattle cafos is 
according to cattle type mature dairy cows veal calves or other and cattle numbers but medium cafos are so designated 
only if they meet certain discharge criteria and small cafos are designated only on a casebycase basis a cafo that 
discharges pollutants is required to obtain a permit which requires a plan to manage nutrient runoff manure chemicals 
contaminants and other wastewater pursuant to the clean water act the regulations involving cafo permitting have been 
extensively litigated commonly cafo wastewater and manure nutrients are applied to land at agronomic rates for use by 
forages or crops and it is often assumed that various constituents of wastewater and manure eg organic contaminants and 
pathogens will be retained inactivated or degraded on the land with application at such rates however additional 
evidence is needed to test reliability of such assumptions concerns raised by opponents of cafos have included risks of 
contaminated water due to feedlot runoff soil erosion human and animal exposure to toxic chemicals development of 
antibiotic resistant bacteria and an increase in e coli contamination while research suggests some of these impacts can 
be mitigated by developing wastewater treatment systems and planting cover crops in larger setback zones the union of 
concerned scientists released a report in concluding that cafos are generally unsustainable and externalize costs an 
estimated cattle operations were operating in the usa in in the us environmental protection agency epa tallied cattle 
cafos then regulated consisting of beef dairy heifer and veal operations since that time the epa has established cafos 
as an enforcement priority epa enforcement highlights for fiscal year indicated enforcement actions against cattle cafos 
for violations that included failures to obtain a permit failures to meet the terms of a permit and discharges of 
contaminated water grazing by cattle at low intensities can create a favourable environment for native herbs and forbs 
in many world regions though cattle are reducing biodiversity due to overgrazing a survey of refuge managers on national 
wildlife refuges in the us tallied species of wildlife considered positively affected and considered negatively affected 
by refuge cattle grazing or haying proper management of pastures notably managed intensive rotational grazing and 
grazing at low intensities can lead to less use of fossil fuel energy increased recapture of carbon dioxide fewer 
ammonia emissions into the atmosphere reduced soil erosion better air quality and less water pollution some microbes in 
the cattle gut carry out anaerobic process known as methanogenesis which produces methane cattle and other livestock 
emit about to tg of methane per year accounting for an estimated of anthropogenic methane emissions and additional 
methane is produced by anaerobic fermentation of manure in manure lagoons and other manure storage structures the year 
global warming potential of methane including effects on ozone and stratospheric water vapor is times as great as that 
of carbon dioxide methanes effect on global warming is correlated with changes in atmospheric methane content not with 
emissions the net change in atmospheric methane content was recently about tg per year and in some recent years there 
has been no increase in atmospheric methane content mitigation options for reducing methane emission from ruminant 
enteric fermentation include genetic selection immunization rumen defaunation diet modification and grazing management 
among others while cattle fed forage actually produce more methane than grainfed cattle the increase may be offset by 
the increased carbon recapture of pastures which recapture three times the co of cropland used for grain health the 
veterinary discipline dealing with cattle and cattle diseases bovine veterinary is called buiatrics veterinarians and 
professionals working on cattle health issues are pooled in the world association for buiatrics founded in national 
associations and affiliates also exist cattle diseases were in the center of attention in the s and s when the bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy bse also known as mad cow disease was of concern cattle might catch and develop various other 
diseases like blackleg bluetongue foot rot too in most state as cattle health is not only a veterinarian issue but also 
a public health issue public health and food safety standards and farming regulations directly affect the daily work of 
farmers who keep cattle however said rules change frequently and are often debated for instance in the uk it was 
proposed in that milk from tubercolosisinfected cattle should be allowed to enter the food chain internal food safety 
regulations might affect a countrys trade policy as well for example the united states has just reviewed its beef import 
rules according to the mad cow standards while mexico forbids the entry of cattle who are older than months cow urine is 
commonly used in india for internal medical purposes it is distilled and then consumed by patients seeking treatment for 
a wide variety of illnesses at present no conclusive medical evidence shows this has any effect however an indian 
medicine containing cow urine has already obtained us patents digital dermatitis is caused by the bacteria from the 
genus treponema is it different than foot rot and can appear under unsanitary conditions such as poor hygiene inadequate 
hoof trimming among other causes it primarily affects dairy cattle and has been known to lower the quantity of milk 
produced however the milk quality remains unaffected mycobacterium vaccae is a non pathogenic possibly even beneficial 
bacteria that is seen naturally in soil that was first isolated from cow dung oxen oxen singular ox are cattle trained 
as draft animals often they are adult castrated males of larger breeds although females and bulls are also used in some 
areas usually an ox is over four years old due to the need for training and to allow it to grow to full size oxen are 
used for plowing transport hauling cargo graingrinding by trampling or by powering machines irrigation by powering pumps 
and wagon drawing oxen were commonly used to skid logs in forests and sometimes still are in lowimpact selectcut logging 
oxen are most often used in teams of two paired for light work such as carting with additional pairs added when more 
power is required sometimes up to a total of or more an ox is a mature bovine which has learned to respond appropriately 
to a teamsters signals these signals are given by verbal commands or by noise whip cracks verbal commands vary according 
to dialect and local tradition in one tradition in north america the commands are back up go backwards gee turn right 
get up walk forward haw turn left whoa stop oxen can pull harder and longer than horses though not as fast as horses 
they are less prone to injury because they are more surefooted many oxen are used worldwide especially in developing 
countries about million draft oxen are used in subsaharan africa in india the number of draft cattle in was estimated at 
million head about half the worlds crop production is thought to depend on land preparation such as plowing made 
possible by animal traction religion traditions and folklore hindu tradition cattle are venerated within the hindu 
religion of india according to vedic scriptures they are to be treated with the same respect as ones mother they appear 
in numerous stories from the puranas and vedas the deity krishna was brought up in a family of cowherders and given the 
name govinda protector of the cows also shiva is traditionally said to ride on the back of a bull named nandi slaughter 
of cows including oxen bulls and calves is forbidden by law in several states of the indian union mcdonalds outlets in 
india do not serve any beef burgers at one time the death sentence was imposed for killing a cow in india according to a 
lodi newssentinel news story written in the s in then contemporary nepal an individual could serve three months in jail 
for killing a pedestrian but one year for injuring a cow and life imprisonment for killing a cow other traditions the 
evangelist st luke is depicted as an ox in christian art in judaism as described in numbers the ashes of a sacrificed 
unblemished red heifer that has never been yoked can be used for ritual purification of people who came into contact 
with a corpse the ox is one of the year cycle of animals which appear in the chinese zodiac related to the chinese 
calendar see ox zodiac the constellation taurus represents a bull an apocryphal story has it that a cow started the 
great chicago fire by kicking over a kerosene lamp michael ahern the reporter who created the cow story admitted in that 
he had fabricated it for more colorful copy on february elm farm ollie became the first cow to fly in an airplane and 
also the first cow to be milked in an airplane the first known law requiring branding in north america was enacted on 
february by connecticut it said that all cattle and pigs had to have a registered brand or earmark by may the akabeko 
red cow is a traditional toy from the aizu region of japan that is thought to ward off illness the case of sherwood v 
walkerinvolving a supposedly barren heifer that was actually pregnantfirst enunciated the concept of mutual mistake as a 
means of destroying the meeting of the minds in contract law the fulani of west africa are the worlds largest nomadic 
cattleherders the maasai tribe of east africa traditionally believe their god engai entitled them to divine rights to 
the ownership of all cattle on earth in heraldry cattle are typically represented in heraldry by the bull population the 
world cattle population is estimated to be about billion the following table shows the cattle population in as of the 
continent of africa has about million head of cattle raised in both traditional and nontraditional systems but are often 
an integral part of the culture and way of life see also notes references 