the domestic dog canis lupus familiaris or canis familiaris is a usually furry carnivorous canid carnivoran mammal the 
global dog population is estimated to between million to over one billion making the dog the most abundant member of 
order carnivora the dog was the first domesticated animal and although it is said that the dog is mans best friend 
regarding of dogs in the developed countries in the developing world they are feral village or community dogs with pet 
dogs uncommon these live their lives as scavengers and have never been owned by humans with one study showing their most 
common response when approached by strangers was to run away or respond with aggression etymology and related 
terminology the term domestic dog is generally used for both of the domesticated and feral varieties the english word 
dog comes from middle english dogge from old english docga a powerful dog breed the term may possibly derive from 
protogermanic dukkn represented in old english fingerdocce fingermuscle the word also shows the familiar petname 
diminutive ga also seen in frogga frog picga pig stagga stag wicga beetle worm among others the term dog may ultimately 
derive from the earliest layer of protoindoeuropean vocabulary reflecting the role of the dog as the earliest 
domesticated animal in thcentury england hound from old english hund was the general word for all domestic canines and 
dog referred to a subtype of hound a group including the mastiff it is believed this dog type was so common it 
eventually became the prototype of the category hound by the th century dog had become the general word and hound had 
begun to refer only to types used for hunting hound cognate to german hund dutch hond common scandinavian hund and 
icelandic hundur is ultimately derived from the protoindoeuropean kwon dog found in sanskrit kukuur welsh ci plural cwn 
latin canis greek kn and lithuanian u in breeding circles a male canine is referred to as a dog while a female is called 
a bitch middle english bicche from old english bicce ultimately from old norse bikkja a group of offspring is a litter 
the father of a litter is called the sire and the mother is called the dam offspring are in general called pups or 
puppies from french poupe until they are about a year old the process of birth is whelping from the old english word 
hwelp cf german welpe dutch welp swedish valpa icelandic hvelpur the term whelp can also be used to refer to the young 
of any canid or as a somewhat archaic alternative to puppy taxonomy in carl linnaeus listed among the types of 
quadrupeds familiar to him the latin word for dog canis among the species within this genus linnaeus listed the fox as 
canis vulpes wolves canis lupus and the domestic dog canis canis in later editions linnaeus dropped canis canis and 
greatly expanded his list of the canis genus of quadrupeds and by included alongside the foxes wolves and jackals and 
many more terms that are now listed as synonyms for domestic dog including aegyptius hairless dog aquaticus water dog 
and mustelinus literally badger dog among these were two that later experts have been widely used for domestic dogs as a 
species canis domesticus and most predominantly canis familiaris the common or familiar dog by with advancements in 
molecular biology the mitochondrial dna mtdna analysis of extant ie living today canidea species indicated that the 
domestic dog is an extremely close relative of the gray wolf differing from it by at most of mtdna sequence in 
comparison the gray wolf differs from its closest wild relative the coyote by about of mitochondrial dna sequence in the 
same year the domestic dog canis familiaris was reclassified as canis lupus familiaris a subspecies of the gray wolf 
canis lupus in mammal species of the world by further genetic analysis indicated that the domestic dog may have emerged 
from multiple wolf populations based on these latest two pieces of research and the reference reclassification canis 
lupus familiaris is the name for the taxon listed by itis however canis familiaris is also accepted due to a 
nomenclature debate regarding the naming of wild and domestic subspecies in a mtdna study of extant and extinct dog and 
wolf specimens raised a question about the appropriateness of this classification refer origin and gray wolf origin the 
origin of the domestic dog canis lupus familiaris or canis familiaris is not clear nuclear dna evidence points to a 
single domestication years ago that predates the rise of agriculture and implies that the earliest dogs arose along with 
huntergatherers and not agriculturists mitochondrial dna evidence points to a domestication years ago and that all 
modern dogs are most closely related to ancient wolf fossils that have been found in europe compared to earlier 
hypotheses which proposed origins in eurasia as well as eastern asia the recent genetic analyses indicate that the dog 
is not a descendant of the extant ie living gray wolf but forms a sister clade that the ancestor is an extinct wolflike 
canid and the dogs genetic closeness to modern wolves is due to admixture the archaeological and morphological evidence 
from several ancient doglike fossils such as the year old goyet specimen from belgium and the year old altai mountains 
specimen from central asia indicates that domestication may have begun earlier than the genetic evidence points to and 
arose in multiple locations it has been proposed that based on the morphological similarity between these and other 
early specimens compared to later prehistoric dogs dated to years bp that these specimens might have provided the stock 
from which dogs later evolved roles with humans domestic dogs inherited complex behaviors such as bite inhibition from 
their wolf ancestors which would have been pack hunters with complex body language these sophisticated forms of social 
cognition and communication may account for their trainability playfulness and ability to fit into human households and 
social situations and these attributes have given dogs a relationship with humans that has enabled them to become one of 
the most successful species on the planet today the dogs value to early human huntergatherers led to them quickly 
becoming ubiquitous across world cultures dogs perform many roles for people such as hunting herding pulling loads 
protection assisting police and military companionship and more recently aiding handicapped individuals this impact on 
human society has given them the nickname mans best friend in the western world in some cultures however dogs are also a 
source of meat early roles wolves and their dog descendants would have derived significant benefits from living in human 
campsmore safety more reliable food lesser caloric needs and more chance to breed they would have benefited from humans 
upright gait that gives them larger range over which to see potential predators and prey as well as color vision that at 
least by day gives humans better visual discrimination camp dogs would also have benefited from human tool use as in 
bringing down larger prey and controlling fire for a range of purposes humans would also have derived enormous benefit 
from the dogs associated with their camps for instance dogs would have improved sanitation by cleaning up food scraps 
dogs may have provided warmth as referred to in the australian aboriginal expression three dog night an exceptionally 
cold night and they would have alerted the camp to the presence of predators or strangers using their acute hearing to 
provide an early warning anthropologists believe the most significant benefit would have been the use of dogs robust 
sense of smell to assist with the hunt the relationship between the presence of a dog and success in the hunt is often 
mentioned as a primary reason for the domestication of the wolf and a study of hunter groups with and without a dog 
gives quantitative support to the hypothesis that the benefits of cooperative hunting was an important factor in wolf 
domestication the cohabitation of dogs and humans would have greatly improved the chances of survival for early human 
groups and the domestication of dogs may have been one of the key forces that led to human success emigrants from 
siberia likely crossed the bering land bridge with dogs in their company and some experts suggest the use of sled dogs 
may have been critical to the success of the waves that entered north america roughly years ago although the earliest 
archaeological evidence of doglike canids in north america dates from about years ago dogs were an important part of 
life for the athabascan population in north america and were their only domesticated animal dogs also carried much of 
the load in the migration of the apache and navajo tribes years ago use of dogs as pack animals in these cultures often 
persisted after the introduction of the horse to north america as pets although it is said that the dog is mans best 
friend regarding of dogs in the developed countries in the developing world they are feral village or community dogs 
with pet dogs uncommon these live their lives as scavengers and have never been owned by humans with one study showing 
their most common response when approached by strangers was to run away or respond with aggression the most widespread 
form of interspecies bonding occurs between humans and dogs and the keeping of dogs as companions particularly by elites 
has a long history as a possible example at the natufian culture site of ain mallaha in israel dated to bc the remains 
of an elderly human and a fourtofivemonthold puppy were found buried together however pet dog populations grew 
significantly after world war ii as suburbanization increased in the s and s dogs were kept outside more often than they 
tend to be today using the expression in the doghouse to describe exclusion from the group signifies the distance 
between the doghouse and the home and were still primarily functional acting as a guard childrens playmate or walking 
companion from the s there have been changes in the role of the pet dog such as the increased role of dogs in the 
emotional support of their human guardians people and dogs have become increasingly integrated and implicated in each 
others lives to the point where pet dogs actively shape the way a family and home are experienced there have been two 
major trends in the changing status of pet dogs the first has been the commodification of the dog shaping it to conform 
to human expectations of personality and behaviour the second has been the broadening of the concept of the family and 
the home to include dogsasdogs within everyday routines and practices there are a vast range of commodity forms 
available to transform a pet dog into an ideal companion the list of goods services and places available is enormous 
from dog perfumes couture furniture and housing to dog groomers therapists trainers and caretakers dog cafes spas parks 
and beaches and dog hotels airlines and cemeteries while dog training as an organized activity can be traced back to the 
th century in the last decades of the th century it became a high profile issue as many normal dog behaviors such as 
barking jumping up digging rolling in dung fighting and urine marking became increasingly incompatible with the new role 
of a pet dog dog training books classes and television programs proliferated as the process of commodifying the pet dog 
continued the majority of contemporary people with dogs describe their pet as part of the family although some 
ambivalence about the relationship is evident in the popular reconceptualization of the doghuman family as a pack a 
dominance model of doghuman relationships has been promoted by some dog trainers such as on the television program dog 
whisperer however it has been disputed that trying to achieve status is characteristic of doghuman interactions pet dogs 
play an active role in family life for example a study of conversations in doghuman families showed how family members 
use the dog as a resource talking to the dog or talking through the dog to mediate their interactions with each other 
another study of dogs roles in families showed many dogs have set tasks or routines undertaken as family members the 
most common of which was helping with the washingup by licking the plates in the dishwasher and bringing in the 
newspaper from the lawn increasingly human family members are engaging in activities centered on the perceived needs and 
interests of the dog or in which the dog is an integral partner such as dog dancing and dog yoga according to statistics 
published by the american pet products manufacturers association in the national pet owner survey in it is estimated 
there are million people with pet dogs in the united states the same survey shows nearly of american households own at 
least one dog of which own just one dog two dogs and nearly more than two dogs there does not seem to be any gender 
preference among dogs as pets as the statistical data reveal an equal number of female and male dog pets yet although 
several programs are undergoing to promote pet adoption less than a fifth of the owned dogs come from a shelter the 
latest study using magnetic resonance imaging mri to humans and dogs together proved that dogs have same response to 
voices and use the same parts of the brain as humans to do so this gives dogs the ability to recognize emotional human 
sounds making them friendly social pets to humans work dogs have lived and worked with humans in so many roles that they 
have earned the unique nickname mans best friend a phrase used in other languages as well they have been bred for 
herding livestock hunting eg pointers and hounds rodent control guarding helping fishermen with nets detection dogs and 
pulling loads in addition to their roles as companions in a huskyterrier mix named laika became the first animal to 
orbit the earth service dogs such as guide dogs utility dogs assistance dogs hearing dogs and psychological therapy dogs 
provide assistance to individuals with physical or mental disabilities some dogs owned by epileptics have been shown to 
alert their handler when the handler shows signs of an impending seizure sometimes well in advance of onset allowing the 
guardian to seek safety medication or medical care dogs included in human activities in terms of helping out humans are 
usually called working dogs dogs of several breeds are considered working dogs some working dog breeds include akita 
alaskan malamute anatolian shepherd dog bernese mountain dog black russian terrier boxer bullmastiff doberman pinscher 
dogue de bordeaux german pinscher german shepherd giant schnauzer great dane great pyrenees great swiss mountain dog 
komondor kuvasz mastiff neapolitan mastiff newfoundland portuguese water dog rottweiler saint bernard samoyed siberian 
husky standard schnauzer and tibetan mastiff sports and shows people often enter their dogs in competitions such as 
breedconformation shows or sports including racing sledding and agility competitions in conformation shows also referred 
to as breed shows a judge familiar with the specific dog breed evaluates individual purebred dogs for conformity with 
their established breed type as described in the breed standard as the breed standard only deals with the externally 
observable qualities of the dog such as appearance movement and temperament separately tested qualities such as ability 
or health are not part of the judging in conformation shows as a food source dog meat is consumed in some east asian 
countries including korea china and vietnam a practice that dates back to antiquity it is estimated that million dogs 
are killed and consumed in asia every year the bbc claims that in more than restaurants served soups made from dog meat 
in south korea in korea the primary dog breed raised for meat the nureongi differs from those breeds raised for pets 
that koreans may keep in their homes the most popular korean dog dish is gaejangguk also called bosintang a spicy stew 
meant to balance the bodys heat during the summer months followers of the custom claim this is done to ensure good 
health by balancing ones gi or vital energy of the body a th century version of gaejangguk explains that the dish is 
prepared by boiling dog meat with scallions and chili powder variations of the dish contain chicken and bamboo shoots 
while the dishes are still popular in korea with a segment of the population dog is not as widely consumed as beef 
chicken and pork a cnn report in china dated march includes an interview with a dog meat vendor who stated that most of 
the dogs that are available for selling to restaurants are raised in special farms but that there is always a chance 
that a sold dog is someones lost pet although dog pet breeds are not considered edible other cultures such as polynesia 
and precolumbian mexico also consumed dog meat in their history however western south asian african and middle eastern 
cultures in general regard consumption of dog meat as taboo in some places however such as in rural areas of poland dog 
fat is believed to have medicinal propertiesbeing good for the lungs for instance dog meat is also consumed in some 
parts of switzerland proponents of dog meat have argued that placing a distinction between livestock and dogs is western 
hypocrisy and that there is no difference with eating the meat of different animals for example in china local economy 
revolved around agriculture in ancient times dogs didnt play a big role like europe on the contrary every ancient 
chinese government instituted some protective policies for farm cattle even illegal to be slaughtered in some cases in 
this way some chinese think westerners are pressing their own values on them they claimed dogs are not born to be 
companions for them health risks to humans in the who reported that people died in asia and africa from rabies a disease 
for which dogs are the most important vector citing a study the us center for disease control estimated in that million 
people in the usa are bitten by dogs each year a study estimated that of the us population is bitten each year in the s 
and s the us averaged fatalities per year while in the s this has increased to of dog bites are from the pet of family 
or friends and of attacks occur on the property of the dogs legal owner a colorado study found bites in children were 
less severe than bites in adults the incidence of dog bites in the us is per inhabitants but for boys aged to the 
incidence rate is per moreover children have a much higher chance to be bitten in the face or neck sharp claws with 
powerful muscles behind them can lacerate flesh in a scratch that can lead to serious infections in the uk between and 
there were dog attacks on humans resulting in working days lost in sick leave in the united states cats and dogs are a 
factor in more than falls each year it has been estimated around of dogrelated injuries treated in uk hospitals are 
domestic accidents the same study found that while dog involvement in road traffic accidents was difficult to quantify 
dogassociated road accidents involving injury more commonly involved twowheeled vehicles toxocara canis dog roundworm 
eggs in dog feces can cause toxocariasis in the united states about cases of toxocara infection are reported in humans 
each year and almost of the us population is infected in great britain of soil samples taken from public parks contained 
t canis eggs untreated toxocariasis can cause retinal damage and decreased vision dog feces can also contain hookworms 
that cause cutaneous larva migrans in humans health benefits for humans the scientific evidence is mixed as to whether 
companionship of a dog can enhance human physical health and psychological wellbeing studies suggesting that there are 
benefits to physical health and psychological wellbeing have been criticised for being poorly controlled and finding 
that the health of elderly people is related to their health habits and social supports but not to their ownership of or 
attachment to a companion animal earlier studies have shown that people who keep pet dogs or cats exhibit better mental 
and physical health than those who do not making fewer visits to the doctor and being less likely to be on medication 
than nonguardians a paper states recent research has failed to support earlier findings that pet ownership is associated 
with a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease a reduced use of general practitioner services or any psychological or 
physical benefits on health for community dwelling older people research has however pointed to significantly less 
absenteeism from school through sickness among children who live with pets in one study new guardians reported a highly 
significant reduction in minor health problems during the first month following pet acquisition and this effect was 
sustained in those with dogs through to the end of the study in addition people with pet dogs took considerably more 
physical exercise than those with cats and those without pets the group without pets exhibited no statistically 
significant changes in health or behaviour the results provide evidence that keeping pets may have positive effects on 
human health and behaviour and that for guardians of dogs these effects are relatively longterm pet guardianship has 
also been associated with increased coronary artery disease survival with human guardians being significantly less 
likely to die within one year of an acute myocardial infarction than those who did not own dogs the health benefits of 
dogs can result from contact with dogs in general and not solely from having dogs as pets for example when in the 
presence of a pet dog people show reductions in cardiovascular behavioral and psychological indicators of anxiety other 
health benefits are gained from exposure to immunestimulating microorganisms which according to the hygiene hypothesis 
can protect against allergies and autoimmune diseases the benefits of contact with a dog also include social support as 
dogs are able to not only provide companionship and social support themselves but also to act as facilitators of social 
interactions between humans one study indicated that wheelchair users experience more positive social interactions with 
strangers when they are accompanied by a dog than when they are not the practice of using dogs and other animals as a 
part of therapy dates back to the late th century when animals were introduced into mental institutions to help 
socialize patients with mental disorders animalassisted intervention research has shown that animalassisted therapy with 
a dog can increase social behaviors such as smiling and laughing among people with alzheimers disease one study 
demonstrated that children with adhd and conduct disorders who participated in an education program with dogs and other 
animals showed increased attendance increased knowledge and skill objectives and decreased antisocial and violent 
behavior compared to those who were not in an animalassisted program medical detection dogs medical detection dogs are 
capable of detecting diseases by sniffing a person of directly or samples of urine or other specimens dogs can detect 
odour in one part per trillion as their brains olfactory cortex is relative to total brain size times larger than humans 
dogs may have as many as million odour receptors in their nose while humans may have only million each dog is trained 
specifically for the detection of single disease from the blood glucose level indicative to diabetes to cancer to train 
a cancer dog requires months a labrador retriever called daisy has detected cancer patients with an accuracy of percent 
and received the blue cross for pets medal for her lifesaving skills shelters every year between and million dogs and 
cats enter us animal shelters the humane society of the united states hsus estimates that approximately to million of 
those dogs and cats are euthanized yearly in the united states however the percentage of dogs in us animal shelters that 
are eventually adopted and removed from the shelters by their new legal owners has increased since the mids from around 
to a average of among reporting shelters and many shelters reporting biology domestic dogs have been selectively bred 
for millennia for various behaviors sensory capabilities and physical attributes modern dog breeds show more variation 
in size appearance and behavior than any other domestic animal nevertheless their morphology is based on that of their 
wild wolf ancestors dogs are predators and scavengers and like many other predatory mammals the dog has powerful muscles 
fused wrist bones a cardiovascular system that supports both sprinting and endurance and teeth for catching and tearing 
dogs are highly variable in height and weight the smallest known adult dog was a yorkshire terrier that stood only cm in 
at the shoulder cm in in length along the headandbody and weighed only grams oz the largest known dog was an english 
mastiff which weighed kg lb and was cm in from the snout to the tail the tallest dog is a great dane that stands cm in 
at the shoulder senses vision like most mammals dogs have only two types of cone photoreceptor making them dichromats 
these cone cells are maximally sensitive between nm and nm behavioural studies have shown that the dogs visual world 
consists of yellows blues and grays but they have difficulty differentiating red and green making their color vision 
equivalent to redgreen color blindness in humans deuteranopia when a human perceives an object as red this object 
appears as yellow to the dog and the human perception of green appears as white a shade of gray this white region the 
neutral point occurs around nm the part of the spectrum which appears bluegreen to humans for dogs wavelengths longer 
than the neutral point cannot be distinguished from each other and all appear as yellow dogs use color instead of 
brightness to differentiate light or dark blueyellow they are less sensitive to differences in grey shades than humans 
and also can detect brightness at about half the accuracy of humans the dogs visual system has evolved to aid proficient 
hunting while a dogs visual acuity is poor that of a poodles has been estimated to translate to a snellen rating of 
their visual discrimination for moving objects is very high dogs have been shown to be able to discriminate between 
humans eg identifying their human guardian at a range of between and metres and ft however this range decreases to 
metres ft if the object is stationary dogs have a temporal resolution of between and hz this means that domestic dogs 
are unlikely to perceive modern tv screens in the same way as humans because these are optimized for humans at hz dogs 
can detect a change in movement that exists in a single diopter of space within their eye humans by comparison require a 
change of between and diopters to detect movement as crepuscular hunters dogs often rely on their vision in low light 
situations they have very large pupils a high density of rods in the fovea an increased flicker rate and a tapetum 
lucidum the tapetum is a reflective surface behind the retina that reflects light to give the photoreceptors a second 
chance to catch the photons there is also a relationship between body size and overall diameter of the eye a range of 
and mm can be found between various breeds of dogs this variance can be substantial and is associated as an adaptation 
toward superior night vision the eyes of different breeds of dogs have different shapes dimensions and retina 
configurations many longnosed breeds have a visual streaka wide foveal region that runs across the width of the retina 
and gives them a very wide field of excellent vision some longmuzzled breeds in particular the sighthounds have a field 
of vision up to compared to for humans shortnosed breeds on the other hand have an area centralis a central patch with 
up to three times the density of nerve endings as the visual streak giving them detailed sight much more like a humans 
some broadheaded breeds with short noses have a field of vision similar to that of humans most breeds have good vision 
but some show a genetic predisposition for myopia such as rottweilers with which one out of every two has been found to 
be myopic dogs also have a greater divergence of the eye axis than humans enabling them to rotate their pupils farther 
in any direction the divergence of the eye axis of dogs ranges from depending on the breed experimentation has proven 
that dogs can distinguish between complex visual images such as that of a cube or a prism dogs also show attraction to 
static visual images such as the silhouette of a dog on a screen their own reflections or videos of dogs however their 
interest declines sharply once they are unable to make social contact with the image hearing the frequency range of dog 
hearing is approximately hz to hz which means that dogs can detect sounds far beyond the upper limit of the human 
auditory spectrum in addition dogs have ear mobility which allows them to rapidly pinpoint the exact location of a sound 
eighteen or more muscles can tilt rotate raise or lower a dogs ear a dog can identify a sounds location much faster than 
a human can as well as hear sounds at four times the distance smell while the human brain is dominated by a large visual 
cortex the dog brain is dominated by an olfactory cortex the olfactory bulb in dogs is roughly forty times bigger than 
the olfactory bulb in humans relative to total brain size with to million smellsensitive receptors the bloodhound 
exceeds this standard with nearly million receptors consequently it has been estimated that dogs in general have an 
olfactory sense ranging from one hundred thousand to one million times more sensitive than a humans in some dog breeds 
such as bloodhounds the olfactory sense may be up to million times greater than a humans the wet nose or rhinarium is 
essential for determining the direction of the air current containing the smell cold receptors in the skin are sensitive 
to the cooling of the skin by evaporation of the moisture by air currents physical characteristics coat the coats of 
domestic dogs are of two varieties double being common with dogs as well as wolves originating from colder climates made 
up of a coarse guard hair and a soft down hair or single with the topcoat only domestic dogs often display the remnants 
of countershading a common natural camouflage pattern a countershaded animal will have dark coloring on its upper 
surfaces and light coloring below which reduces its general visibility thus many breeds will have an occasional blaze 
stripe or star of white fur on their chest or underside tail there are many different shapes for dog tails straight 
straight up sickle curled or corkscrew as with many canids one of the primary functions of a dogs tail is to communicate 
their emotional state which can be important in getting along with others in some hunting dogs however the tail is 
traditionally docked to avoid injuries in some breeds such as the braque du bourbonnais puppies can be born with a short 
tail or no tail at all types and breeds most breeds of dog are at most a few hundred years old having been artificially 
selected for particular morphologies and behaviors by people for specific functional roles through this selective 
breeding the dog has developed into hundreds of varied breeds and shows more behavioral and morphological variation than 
any other land mammal for example height measured to the withers ranges from centimetres in in the chihuahua to about cm 
in in the irish wolfhound color varies from white through grays usually called blue to black and browns from light tan 
to dark red or chocolate in a wide variation of patterns coats can be short or long coarsehaired to woollike straight 
curly or smooth it is common for most breeds to shed this coat while all dogs are genetically very similar natural 
selection and selective breeding have reinforced certain characteristics in certain populations of dogs giving rise to 
dog types and dog breeds dog types are broad categories based on function genetics or characteristics dog breeds are 
groups of animals that possess a set of inherited characteristics that distinguishes them from other animals within the 
same species modern dog breeds are nonscientific classifications of dogs kept by modern kennel clubs purebred dogs of 
one breed are genetically distinguishable from purebred dogs of other breeds but the means by which kennel clubs 
classify dogs is unsystematic systematic analyses of the dog genome has revealed only four major types of dogs that can 
be said to be statistically distinct these include the old world dogs eg malamute and shar pei mastifftype eg english 
mastiff herdingtype eg border collie and all others also called modern or huntingtype health dogs are susceptible to 
various diseases ailments and poisons some of which can affect humans to defend against many common diseases dogs are 
often vaccinated there are many household plants that are poisonous to dogs including begonia poinsettia and aloe vera 
poinsettia is often claimed to be toxic but this is untrue some breeds of dogs are prone to certain genetic ailments 
such as elbow and hip dysplasia blindness deafness pulmonic stenosis cleft palate and trick knees two serious medical 
conditions particularly affecting dogs are pyometra affecting unspayed females of all types and ages and bloat which 
affects the larger breeds or deepchested dogs both of these are acute conditions and can kill rapidly dogs are also 
susceptible to parasites such as fleas ticks and mites as well as hookworms tapeworms roundworms and heartworms a number 
of common human foods and household ingestibles are toxic to dogs including chocolate solids theobromine poisoning onion 
and garlic thiosulphate sulfoxide or disulfide poisoning grapes and raisins macadamia nuts xylitol as well as various 
plants and other potentially ingested materials the nicotine in tobacco can also be dangerous dogs can get it by 
scavenging in garbage or ashtrays eating cigars and cigarettes signs can be vomiting of large amounts eg from eating 
cigar butts or diarrhea some other signs are abdominal pain loss of coordination collapse or death dogs are highly 
susceptible to theobromine poisoning typically from ingestion of chocolate theobromine is toxic to dogs because although 
the dogs metabolism is capable of breaking down the chemical the process is so slow that even small amounts of chocolate 
can be fatal especially dark chocolate dogs are also vulnerable to some of the same health conditions as humans 
including diabetes dental and heart disease epilepsy cancer hypothyroidism and arthritis lifespan the typical lifespan 
of dogs varies widely among breeds but for most the median longevity the age at which half the dogs in a population have 
died and half are still alive ranges from to years individual dogs may live well beyond the median of their breed the 
breed with the shortest lifespan among breeds for which there is a questionnaire survey with a reasonable sample size is 
the dogue de bordeaux with a median longevity of about years but several breeds including miniature bull terriers 
bloodhounds and irish wolfhounds are nearly as shortlived with median longevities of to years the longestlived breeds 
including toy poodles japanese spitz border terriers and tibetan spaniels have median longevities of to years the median 
longevity of mixedbreed dogs taken as an average of all sizes is one or more years longer than that of purebred dogs 
when all breeds are averaged the dog widely reported to be the longestlived is bluey who died in and was claimed to be 
years old at the time of his death however the bluey record is anecdotal and unverified on december pusuke the worlds 
oldest living dog recognized by guinness book of world records died aged years and months predation although large wild 
dogs like wolves are apex predators they can be killed in territory disputes with wild animals furthermore in areas 
where both dogs and other large predators live dogs can be a major food source for big cats or canines reports from 
croatia indicate wolves kill dogs more frequently than they kill sheep wolves in russia apparently limit feral dog 
populations in wisconsin more compensation has been paid for dog losses than livestock some wolf pairs have been 
reported to prey on dogs by having one wolf lure the dog out into heavy brush where the second animal waits in ambush in 
some instances wolves have displayed an uncharacteristic fearlessness of humans and buildings when attacking dogs to the 
extent that they have to be beaten off or killed coyotes and big cats have also been known to attack dogs leopards in 
particular are known to have a predilection for dogs and have been recorded to kill and consume them regardless of the 
dogs size or ferocity tigers in manchuria indochina indonesia and malaysia are reputed to kill dogs with the same vigor 
as leopards striped hyenas are major predators of village dogs in turkmenistan india and the caucasus reptiles such as 
alligators and pythons have been known to kill and eat dogs diet despite their descent from wolves and classification as 
carnivora dogs are variously described in scholarly and other writings as carnivores or omnivores unlike obligate 
carnivores such as the cat family with its shorter small intestine dogs can adapt to a wideranging diet and are not 
dependent on meatspecific protein nor a very high level of protein in order to fulfill their basic dietary requirements 
dogs will healthily digest a variety of foods including vegetables and grains and can consume a large proportion of 
these in their diet compared to their wolf ancestors dogs have adaptations in genes involved in starch digestion that 
contribute to an increased ability to thrive on a starchrich diet reproduction in domestic dogs sexual maturity begins 
to happen around age six to twelve months for both males and females although this can be delayed until up to two years 
old for some large breeds this is the time at which female dogs will have their first estrous cycle they will experience 
subsequent estrous cycles biannually during which the body prepares for pregnancy at the peak of the cycle females will 
come into estrus being mentally and physically receptive to copulation because the ova survive and are capable of being 
fertilized for a week after ovulation it is possible for a female to mate with more than one male days post conception 
fertilization occurs days embryo attaches to uterus days heart beat is detectable dogs bear their litters roughly to 
days after fertilization with an average of days although the length of gestation can vary an average litter consists of 
about six puppies though this number may vary widely based on the breed of dog in general toy dogs produce from one to 
four puppies in each litter while much larger breeds may average as many as twelve some dog breeds have acquired traits 
through selective breeding that interfere with reproduction male french bulldogs for instance are incapable of mounting 
the female for many dogs of this breed the female must be artificially inseminated in order to reproduce neutering 
neutering refers to the sterilization of animals usually by removal of the males testicles or the females ovaries and 
uterus in order to eliminate the ability to procreate and reduce sex drive because of the overpopulation of dogs in some 
countries many animal control agencies such as the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals aspca 
advise that dogs not intended for further breeding should be neutered so that they do not have undesired puppies that 
may have to later be euthanized according to the humane society of the united states million dogs and cats are put down 
each year in the united states and many more are confined to cages in shelters because there are many more animals than 
there are homes spaying or castrating dogs helps keep overpopulation down local humane societies spcas and other animal 
protection organizations urge people to neuter their pets and to adopt animals from shelters instead of purchasing them 
neutering reduces problems caused by hypersexuality especially in male dogs spayed female dogs are less likely to 
develop some forms of cancer affecting mammary glands ovaries and other reproductive organs however neutering increases 
the risk of urinary incontinence in female dogs and prostate cancer in males as well as osteosarcoma hemangiosarcoma 
cruciate ligament rupture obesity and diabetes mellitus in either sex communication by the age of four weeks the dog has 
developed the majority of its vocalizations the dog is the most vocal canid and is unique in its tendency to bark in a 
myriad of situations barking appears to have little more communication functions than excitement fighting the presence 
of a human or simply because other dogs are barking subtler signs such as discreet bodily and facial movements body 
odors whines yelps and growls are the main sources of actual communication the majority of these subtle communication 
techniques are employed at a close proximity to another but for longrange communication only barking and howling are 
employed intelligence and behavior intelligence the domestic dog has a predisposition to exhibit a social intelligence 
that is uncommon in the animal world dogs are capable of learning in a number of ways such as through simple 
reinforcement eg classical or operant conditioning and by observation dogs go through a series of stages of cognitive 
development as with humans the understanding that objects not being actively perceived still remain in existence called 
object permanence is not present at birth it develops as the young dog learns to interact intentionally with objects 
around it at roughly weeks of age puppies learn behaviors quickly by following examples set by experienced dogs this 
form of intelligence is not peculiar to those tasks dogs have been bred to perform but can be generalized to myriad 
abstract problems for example dachshund puppies that watched an experienced dog pull a cart by tugging on an attached 
piece of ribbon in order to get a reward from inside the cart learned the task fifteen times faster than those left to 
solve the problem on their own dogs can also learn by mimicking human behaviors in one study puppies were presented with 
a box and shown that when a handler pressed a lever a ball would roll out of the box the handler then allowed the puppy 
to play with the ball making it an intrinsic reward the pups were then allowed to interact with the box roughly three 
quarters of the puppies subsequently touched the lever and over half successfully released the ball compared to only in 
a control group that did not watch the human manipulate the lever another study found that handing an object between 
experimenters who then used the objects name in a sentence successfully taught an observing dog each objects name 
allowing the dog to subsequently retrieve the item dogs also demonstrate sophisticated social cognition by associating 
behavioral cues with abstract meanings one such class of social cognition involves the understanding that others are 
conscious agents research has shown that dogs are capable of interpreting subtle social cues and appear to recognize 
when a human or dogs attention is focused on them to test this researchers devised a task in which a reward was hidden 
underneath one of two buckets the experimenter then attempted to communicate with the dog to indicate the location of 
the reward by using a wide range of signals tapping the bucket pointing to the bucket nodding to the bucket or simply 
looking at the bucket the results showed that domestic dogs were better than chimpanzees wolves and human infants at 
this task and even young puppies with limited exposure to humans performed well psychology research has shown that 
humans gaze instinctively moves to the left in order to watch the right side of a persons face which is related to use 
of right hemisphere brain for facial recognition including human facial emotions research at the university of lincoln 
shows that dogs share this instinct when meeting a human being and only when meeting a human being ie not other animals 
or other dogs as such they are the only nonprimate species known to do so stanley coren an expert on dog psychology 
states that these results demonstrated the social cognition of dogs can exceed that of even our closest genetic 
relatives and that this capacity is a recent genetic acquisition that distinguishes the dog from the wolf studies have 
also investigated whether dogs engaged in partnered play change their behavior depending on the attentionstate of their 
partner those studies showed that play signals were only sent when the dog was holding the attention of its partner if 
the partner was distracted the dog instead engaged in attentiongetting behavior before sending a play signal coren has 
also argued that dogs demonstrate a sophisticated theory of mind by engaging in deception which he supports with a 
number of anecdotes including one example wherein a dog hid a stolen treat by sitting on it until the rightful owner of 
the treat left the room although this could have been accidental coren suggests that the thief understood that the 
treats owner would be unable to find the treat if it were out of view together the empirical data and anecdotal evidence 
points to dogs possessing at least a limited form of theory of mind similar research has been performed by brian hare of 
duke university who has shown that dogs outperform both great apes as well as wolves raised by humans in reading human 
communicative signals a study found a third of dogs suffered from anxiety when separated from others a border collie 
named chaser has learned the names for toys after three years of training so many that her trainers have had to mark the 
names of the objects lest they forget themselves this is higher than rico another border collie who could remember at 
least objects dogs can discriminate the emotional expressions of human faces behavior although dogs have been the 
subject of a great deal of behaviorist psychology eg pavlovs dog they do not enter the world with a psychological blank 
slate rather dog behavior is affected by genetic as well as environmental factors domestic dogs exhibit a number of 
behaviors and predispositions that were inherited from wolves after undergoing training to solve a simple manipulation 
task dogs that are faced with an insoluble version of the same problem look at the human while socialized wolves do not 
given that dogs abilities to use human social cues originated during the process of domestication it is likely that 
individual dogs that were able to use social cues to predict the behavior of humans more flexibly than could their last 
common wolf ancestor were at a selective advantage the existence and nature of personality traits in dogs has been 
studied dogs of different breeds and five consistent and stable narrow traits identified described as playfulness 
curiosityfearlessness chaseproneness sociability and aggressiveness a further higher order axis for shynessboldness was 
also identified the average sleep time of a dog is said to be hours per day like humans dogs have two main types of 
sleep slowwave sleep then rapid eye movement sleep the state in which dreams occur dogs prefer when they are off the 
leash and earths magnetic field is calm to urinate and defecate with their bodies aligned on a northsouth axis dog growl 
a new study in budapest hungary has found that dogs are able to tell how big another dog is just by listening to its 
growl a specific growl is used by dogs to protect their food the research also shows that dogs do not or can not 
misrepresent their size and this is the first time research has shown animals can determine anothers size by the sound 
it makes the test using images of many kinds of dogs showed a small and big dog and played a growl the result showed 
that of the test dogs looked at the image of the appropriately sized dog first and looked at it longest additionally 
most people can tell from a bark whether a dog was alone or being approached by a stranger playing or being aggressive 
and able tell from a growl how big the dog is this is thought to be evidence of humandog coevolution differences from 
wolves physical characteristics compared to equally sized wolves dogs tend to have smaller skulls smaller brains as well 
as proportionately smaller teeth than other canid species dogs require fewer calories to function than wolves it is 
thought by certain experts that the dogs limp ears are a result of atrophy of the jaw muscles the skin of domestic dogs 
tends to be thicker than that of wolves with some inuit tribes favoring the former for use as clothing due to its 
greater resistance to wear and tear in harsh weather wolves do not have dewclaws on their back legs unless there has 
been admixture with dogs behavioral differences dogs tend to be poorer than wolves at observational learning being more 
responsive to instrumental conditioning feral dogs show little of the complex social structure or dominance hierarchy 
present in wolf packs for example unlike wolves the dominant alpha pairs of a feral dog pack do not force the other 
members to wait for their turn on a meal when scavenging off a dead ungulate as the whole family is free to join in for 
dogs other members of their kind are of no help in locating food items and are more like competitors feral dogs are 
primarily scavengers with studies showing that unlike their wild cousins they are poor ungulate hunters having little 
impact on wildlife populations where they are sympatric however feral dogs have been reported to be effective hunters of 
reptiles in the galpagos islands and free ranging pet dogs are more prone to predatory behavior toward wild animals 
domestic dogs can be monogamous breeding in feral packs can be but does not have to be restricted to a dominant alpha 
pair such things also occur in wolf packs male dogs are unusual among canids by the fact that they mostly seem to play 
no role in raising their puppies and do not kill the young of other females to increase their own reproductive success 
some sources say that dogs differ from wolves and most other large canid species by the fact that they do not 
regurgitate food for their young nor the young of other dogs in the same territory however this difference was not 
observed in all domestic dogs regurgitating of food by the females for the young as well as care for the young by the 
males has been observed in domestic dogs dingos as well as in other feral or semiferal dogs regurgitating of food by the 
females and direct choosing of only one mate has been observed even in those semiferal dogs of direct domestic dog 
ancestry also regurgitating of food by males has been observed in freeranging domestic dogs in a study to observe the 
differences between dogs and wolves raised in similar conditions took place the dog puppies preferred larger amounts of 
sleep at the beginning of their lives while the wolf puppies were much more active the dog puppies also preferred the 
company of humans rather than their canine foster mother though the wolf puppies were the exact opposite spending more 
time with their foster mother the dogs also showed a greater interest in the food given to them and paid little 
attention to their surroundings while the wolf puppies found their surroundings to be much more intriguing than their 
food or food bowl the wolf puppies were observed taking part in agonistic play at a younger age while the dog puppies 
did not display dominantsubmissive roles until they were much older the wolf puppies were rarely seen as being 
aggressive to each other or towards the other canines on the other hand the dog puppies were much more aggressive to 
each other and other canines often seen fullon attacking their foster mother or one another trainability dogs display 
much greater tractability than tame wolves and are in general much more responsive to coercive techniques involving fear 
aversive stimuli and force than wolves which are most responsive toward positive conditioning and rewards unlike tame 
wolves dogs tend to respond more to voice than hand signals cultural depictions dogs have been viewed and represented in 
different manners by different cultures and religions over the course of history mythology in mythology dogs often serve 
as pets or as watchdogs in greek mythology cerberus is a threeheaded watchdog who guards the gates of hades in norse 
mythology a bloody foureyed dog called garmr guards helheim in persian mythology two foureyed dogs guard the chinvat 
bridge in philippine mythology kimat who is the pet of tadaklan god of thunder is responsible for lightning in welsh 
mythology annwn is guarded by cn annwn in hindu mythology yama the god of death owns two watch dogs who have four eyes 
they are said to watch over the gates of naraka hunter god muthappan from north malabar region of kerala has a hunting 
dog as his mount dogs are found in and out of the muthappan temple and offerings at the shrine take the form of bronze 
dog figurines religion and culture in islam dogs are viewed as unclean scavengers in in the hague in the netherlands 
hasan kk a representative on the hague city council for the islam democrats called for the possession of dogs in the 
hague to be criminalized in lrida spain two islamic groups asked local officials to ban dogs from all areas frequented 
by muslim immigrants saying their presence violated the muslims religious freedom in britain police sniffer dogs trained 
to identify bombs carried by terrorists at train stations are no longer allowed to come into contact with muslim 
passengers following complaints that it was offensive to their religion in judaism jewish law does not prohibit keeping 
dogs and other pets jewish law requires jews to feed their dogs before themselves and make arrangements for feeding them 
before first obtaining them in christianity dogs represent faithfulness in asian countries such as china korea and japan 
dogs are viewed as kind protectors the role of the dog in chinese mythology includes a position as one of the twelve 
animals which cyclically represent years the zodiacal dog gallery of dogs in art see also aging in dogs animal track 
argos dog dog in chinese mythology dogs in art dog odor dognapping ethnocynology hachika notable example of dog loyalty 
lost pet services wolfdog lists list of dog breeds list of fictional dogs list of individual dogs list of most popular 
dog breeds references bibliography miklsi adm dog behaviour evolution and cognition oxford university press doiacprofoso 
isbn further reading de vito dominique september world atlas of dog breeds print th ed neptune city nj lanham md tfh 
publications inc pp pages isbn isbn wilcox bonnie walkowicz chris march atlas of dog breeds of the world print th ed 
neptune city nj lanham md tfh publications inc distributed in the us to the bookstore and library trade by national book 
network p isbn isbn external links biodiversity heritage library bibliography for canis lupus familiaris fdration 
cynologique internationale fci world canine organisation dogs in the ancient world an article on the history of dogs 
view the dog genome on ensembl