
eagle is a common name for many large birds of prey of the family accipitridae it belongs to several groups of genera 
that are not necessarily closely related to each other most of the sixty species of eagles are from eurasia and africa 
outside this area just fourteen species can be found two in north america nine in central and south america and three in 
australia description eagles are large powerfully built birds of prey with a heavy head and beak even the smallest 
eagles like the booted eagle aquila pennata which is comparable in size to a common buzzard buteo buteo or redtailed 
hawk b jamaicensis have relatively longer and more evenly broad wings and more direct faster flight despite the reduced 
size of aerodynamic feathers most eagles are larger than any other raptors apart from some vultures the smallest species 
of eagle is the south nicobar serpent eagle spilornis klossi at g lb and cm in the largest species are discussed below 
like all birds of prey eagles have very large hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey strong muscular legs and 
powerful talons the beak is typically heavier than that of most other birds of prey eagles eyes are extremely powerful 
having up to times human acuity for the martial eagle which enables them to spot potential prey from a very long 
distance this keen eyesight is primarily attributed to their extremely large pupils which ensure minimal diffraction 
scattering of the incoming light the female of all known species of eagle is larger than the male eagles normally build 
their nests called eyries in tall trees or on high cliffs many species lay two eggs but the older larger chick 
frequently kills its younger sibling once it has hatched the dominant chick tends to be the female as they are bigger 
than the male the parents take no action to stop the killing due to the size and power of many eagle species they are 
ranked at the top of the food chain as apex predators in the avian world the type of prey varies from genus to genus the 
haliaeetus and ichthyophaga eagles prefer to capture fish though the species in the former often capture various animals 
especially other water birds and are powerful kleptoparasites of other birds the snake and serpent eagles of the genera 
circaetus terathopius and spilornis predominantly prey on the great diversity of snakes that are found in the tropics of 
africa and asia the eagles of the genus aquila are often the top birds of prey in open habitats taking almost any 
mediumsized vertebrate they can catch where aquila eagles are absent other eagles such as the buteonine blackchested 
buzzardeagle of south america may assume the position of top raptorial predator in open areas many other eagles 
including the speciesrich spizaetus genus live predominantly in woodlands and forest these eagles often target various 
arboreal or grounddwelling mammals and birds which are often unsuspectingly ambushed in such dense knotty environments 
hunting techniques differ among the species and genera with some individual eagles having engaged in quite varied 
techniques based their environment and prey at any given time most eagles grab prey without landing and take flight with 
it so the prey can be carried to a perch and torn apart the bald eagle is noted for having flown with the heaviest load 
verified to be carried by any flying bird since one eagle flew with a kg lb mule deer fawn however a few eagles may 
target prey considerably heavier than themselves such prey is too heavy to fly with and thus it is either eaten at the 
site of the kill or taken in pieces back to a perch or nest golden and crowned eagles have killed ungulates weighing up 
to kg lb and a martial eagle even killed a kg lb duiker times heavier than the predating eagle authors on birds david 
allen sibley pete dunne and clay sutton described the behavioral difference between hunting eagles and other birds of 
prey thus in this case the bald and golden eagles as compared to other north american raptors they have at least one 
singular characteristic it has been observed that most birds of prey look back over their shoulders before striking prey 
or shortly thereafter predation is after all a twoedged sword all hawks seem to have this habit from the smallest 
kestrel to the largest ferruginous but not the eagles among the eagles are some of the largest birds of prey only the 
condors and some of the old world vultures are markedly larger it is regularly debated which should be considered the 
largest species of eagle they could be measured variously in total length body mass or wingspan different lifestyle 
needs among various eagles result in variable measurements from species to species for example many forestdwelling 
eagles including the very large harpy and philippine eagles have relatively short wingspans a feature necessary for 
being able to maneuver in quick short bursts through dense forested habitats on the other hand eagles in the genus 
aquila are found almost strictly in open country are superlative soarers and have relatively long wings for their size 
here are lists of the top five eagles going on weight length and lastly wingspan unless otherwise noted via reference 
the figures listed are the median reported for each measurement in the guide raptors of the world fergusonlees et al in 
which only measurements that could be personally verified by the authors were listed distribution nearctic usa and 
canada golden eagle also found in palearctic bald eagle neotropical central and south america spizaetus species solitary 
eagles spp harpy eagle crested eagle blackchested buzzardeagle australasian australia wedgetailed eagle range extends 
into southern new guinea whitebellied seaeagle range extends into asia little eagle new guinea papuan eagle whitebellied 
seaeagle pygmy eagle groups eagles are often informally divided into four groups the snake eagles are placed in the 
subfamily circaetinae the fish eagles booted eagles and harpy eagles have traditionally been placed in the subfamily 
buteoninae together with the buzzardhawks buteonine hawks and harriers some authors may treat these groups as tribes of 
the buteoninae lerner mindell proposed separating the eagle groups into their own subfamilies of accipitridae fish 
eagles sea eagles or fish eagles take fish as a large part of their diets either fresh or as carrion proposed subfamily 
haliaeetinae genera haliaeetus ichthyophaga some authors include gypohierax angolensis the vulturine fish eagle also 
called the palmnut vulture in this group however genetic analyses indicate it is related to a grouping of 
neophrongypaetuseutriorchis egyptian vulture bearded vulture lammergeier and madagascan serpent eagle the fish eagles 
have a close genetic relationship with haliastur and milvus the whole group is only distantly related to the buteo group 
booted eagles booted eagles or true eagles have feathered tarsi lower legs tribe aquililae or proposed subfamily 
aquilinae genera aquila hieraaetus spizaetus oroaetus spizastur nisaetus ictinaetus lophoaetus polemaetus and 
stephanoaetus see comments under eagle species for changes to the composition of these genera snake eagles snake or 
serpent eagles are as the name suggests adapted to hunting reptiles subfamily circaetinae genera circaetus spilornis 
dryotriorchis terathopius eutriorchis subfamily gypaetinae or circaetinae despite filling the niche of a snake eagle 
genetic studies suggest that the madagascan serpent eagle eutriorchis is not related harpy eagles harpy eagles or giant 
forest eagles are large eagles that inhabit tropical forests the group contains two to six species depending on the 
author although these birds occupy similar niches and have traditionally been grouped together they are not all related 
the solitary eagles are related to the blackhawks and the philippine eagle to the snake eagles harpy eagles proposed 
subfamily harpiinae harpia harpyja harpy eagle central and south america morphnus guianensis crested eagle central and 
south america harpyopsis novaeguineae papuan eagle new guinea philippine eagle pithecophaga jefferyi philippine eagle 
philippines solitary eagles crowned eagle or crowned solitary eagle buteogallus formerly harpyhaliaetus coronatus south 
america solitary eagle or montane solitary eagle buteogallus formerly harpyhaliaetus solitarius south america species 
major new research into eagle taxonomy suggests that the important genera aquila and hieraaetus are not composed of 
nearest relatives and it is likely that a reclassification of these genera will soon take place with some species being 
moved to lophaetus or ictinaetus bonellis eagle and the african hawkeagle have been moved from hieraaetus to aquila 
either the greater spotted eagle and lesser spotted eagle should move from aquila to join the longcrested eagle in 
lophaetus or perhaps better all three of these species should move to ictinaetus with the black eagle the steppe eagle 
and tawny eagle once thought to be conspecific are not even each others nearest relatives family accipitridae subfamily 
buteoninae hawks buzzards true eagles and seaeagles genus geranoaetus blackchested buzzardeagle geranoaetus melanoleucus 
genus harpyhaliaetus crowned solitary eagle harpyhaliaetus coronatus montane solitary eagle h solitarius genus morphnus 
crested eagle morphnus guianensis genus harpia harpy eagle harpia harpyja genus pithecophaga philippine eagle 
pithecophaga jefferyi genus harpyopsis papuan eagle harpyopsis novaeguineae genus spizaetus black hawkeagle s tyrannus 
ornate hawkeagle s ornatus blackandwhite hawkeagle s melanoleucus formerly spizastur blackandchestnut eagle s isidori 
formerly oroaetus genus nisaetus previously included in spizaetus changeable or crested hawkeagle n cirrhatus flores 
hawkeagle n floris earlier a subspecies s c floris sulawesi hawkeagle n lanceolatus mountain hawkeagle n nipalensis 
legges hawkeagle nisaetus kelaarti previously a race of s nipalensis blyths hawkeagle n alboniger javan hawkeagle n 
bartelsi northern philippine hawkeagle n philippensis pinskers hawkeagle southern philippine hawkeagle nisaetus pinskeri 
earlier s philippensis pinskeri wallaces hawkeagle n nanus genus lophaetus longcrested eagle lophaetus occipitalis 
possibly belongs in ictinaetus genus stephanoaetus crowned eagle stephanoaetus coronatus genus polemaetus martial eagle 
polemaetus bellicosus genus hieraaetus ayress hawkeagle h ayresii little eagle h morphnoides pygmy eagle h weiskei 
previously subspecies h m weiskei booted eagle h pennatus genus harpagornis extinct haasts eagle harpagornis moorei 
possibly belongs in either hieraaetus or aquila genus lophotriorchis rufousbellied hawkeagle l kienerii genus aquila 
bonellis eagle aquila fasciata formerly hieraaetus fasciatus african hawkeagle a spilogaster formerly in hieraaetus 
cassins hawkeagle a africana formerly in hieraaetus or spizaetus genera golden eagle a chrysaetos eastern imperial eagle 
a heliaca spanish imperial eagle a adalberti steppe eagle a nipalensis tawny eagle a rapax greater spotted eagle a 
clanga to be moved to lophaetus or ictinaetus lesser spotted eagle a pomarina to be moved to lophaetus or ictinaetus 
indian spotted eagle a hastata to be moved to lophaetus or ictinaetus verreauxs eagle a verreauxii gurneys eagle a 
gurneyi wahlbergs eagle a wahlbergi to be moved to hieraaetus wedgetailed eagle a audax genus ictinaetus black eagle 
ictinaetus malayensis genus haliaeetus whitetailed eagle haliaeetus albicilla bald eagle h leucocephalus stellers sea 
eagle h pelagicus african fish eagle h vocifer whitebellied sea eagle h leucogaster sanfords sea eagle h sanfordi 
madagascar fish eagle h vociferoides pallas sea eagle h leucoryphus genus ichthyophaga lesser fish eagle ichthyophaga 
humilis greyheaded fish eagle i ichthyaetus subfamily circaetinae snakeeagles genus terathopius bateleur terathopius 
ecaudatus genus circaetus shorttoed snake eagle circaetus gallicus blackchested snake eagle c pectoralis brown snake 
eagle c cinereus fasciated snake eagle c fasciolatus western banded snake eagle c cinerascens genus dryotriorchis congo 
serpent eagle d spectabilis genus spilornis crested serpent eagle spilornis cheela central nicobar serpent eagle s 
minimus subspecies or species great nicobar serpent eagle s klossi mountain serpent eagle s kinabaluensis sulawesi 
serpent eagle s rufipectus philippine serpent eagle s holospilus andaman serpent eagle s elgini genus eutriorchis 
madagascar serpent eagle eutriorchis astur eagles in culture etymology the modern english term for the bird is derived 
from latin aquila by way of french aigle the origin of aquila is unknown but it is believed to possibly derive from 
either aquilus meaning darkcolored swarthy or blackish as a reference to the plumage of eagles or from aquilo meaning 
north wind old english used the term earn related to scandinavias rn rn it is similar to other indoeuropean terms for 
bird or eagle including greek orns russian orl and welsh eryr the albanian word for eagle is shqiponj deriving from the 
root shqipe in britain before eagle referred specifically to the golden eagle with the other native species the 
whitetailed eagle being known as erne the modern name golden eagle for aquila chrysaetos was introduced by the 
naturalist john ray religion the moche people of ancient peru worshiped the animal and often depicted eagles in their 
art the eagle is also the patron animal of the ancient greek god zeus in particular zeus was said to have taken the form 
of an eagle in order to abduct ganymede and there are numerous artistic depictions of the eagle zeus bearing ganymede 
aloft from classical times up to the present see illustrations in the ganymede mythology page despite modern and 
historic native american practices of giving eagle feathers to nonindigenous people and also members of other tribes who 
have been deemed worthy current united states eagle feather law stipulates that only individuals of certifiable native 
american ancestry enrolled in a federally recognized tribe are legally authorized to obtain eagle feathers for religious 
or spiritual reasons in canada the poaching of eagle feathers for the booming us market has sometimes resulted in the 
arrests of first nations person for the crime the eagle is a common form in the anglican tradition often used to support 
the bible because of the symbolism of spreading the gospel over the world additional symbolic meanings for eagle include 
the pronouncements to the israelites in exodus psalms and isaiah in hinduism garuda is a lesser divinity usually the 
mount vahanam of vishnu garuda is depicted as having the golden body of a strong man with a white face red wings and an 
eagles beak and with a crown on his head this ancient deity was said to be massive large enough to block out the sun as 
national symbols eagles have been used by many nations as a national symbol the coat of arms and flag of albania has a 
black doubleheaded eagle furthermore the eagle gives albania its name in albanian shqiperia means land of the eagles and 
albanians call themselves shqipetar or shqipe meaning eagles the coat of arms of armenia has a gold eagle and a lion the 
coat of arms of austria has a black eagle the coat of arms of the czech republic integrates the symbols of moravia and 
silesia both with female eagles in their emblems redandwhite chequered and black respectively with bohemias lion the 
coat of arms of egypt is a golden eagle looking towards the viewers left it is taking from the golden eagle of saladin 
founded on saladin citadel of cairo the coat of arms of germany has a black eagle the coat of arms of ghana has two 
golden eagles holding it the coat of arms of iceland has an eagle holding it as well as a dragon a bull and a giant the 
coat of arms of indonesia has an eaglelike garuda carrying a shield on its neck and a banner on its feet the coat of 
arms of iraq has the golden eagle of saladin the coat of arms of mexico has a golden eagle perched upon a cactus 
devouring a snake the coat of arms of moldova consists of a stylized eagle holding a cross in its beak and a sceptre and 
a branch in its claws the coat of arms of montenegro represents the twoheaded eagle in flight the coat of arms of 
navarrebasque country kingdom has a black eagle the coat of arms of nigeria has a red eagle on top the coat of arms of 
palestine has the golden eagle of saladin the coat of arms of panama has a harpy eagle the coat of arms of the 
philippines has the bald eagle of the united states as a symbol of its colonial past but the monkeyeating eagle is the 
de jure national bird of the country the coat of arms of poland has a white eagle with a golden beak and talons wearing 
a golden crown the coat of arms of romania has a golden aquila holding a cross in its beak and a mace and a sword in its 
claws the coat of arms of russia has a gold doubleheaded eagle the coat of arms of serbia has a white bicephalic eagle 
of the house of nemanji the coat of arms of syria formerly had the eagle of saladin the great seal of the united states 
has a bald eagle the coat of arms of yemen depicts a golden eagle with a scroll between its claws the coat of arms of 
zambia has an orange red eagle on top the polish and the serbian eagles are distinguished by their white color historic 
uses the ptolemaic rulers of egypt used it as their seal napoleon i used the roman golden eagle as the symbol of his new 
french empire persian empire the symbol of the persian army was an eagle the romans used it on the standards of their 
armies from this derives the late byzantine empire chose a twoheaded golden eagle as its symbol it is popularly that one 
head symbolised ancient rome and the other head symbolized new rome at constantinople from this derives the twoheaded 
eagle is the emblem of shqipria or land of the eagles which is known in english as albania see the tale of the eagle for 
the legendary origin of the name after the fall of constantinople the russian empire took the twoheaded eagle as its own 
symbol after his crowning as the new roman emperor charlemagne adopted the ancient roman eagle as his own symbol the 
holy roman empire born of his kingdom took the eagle but the habsburgs replaced the golden eagle by an imperial eagle 
from this derives the austrian empire had a twoheaded eagle as its symbol after the abolition of austriahungary austria 
took as its symbol a oneheaded eagle in the modern coat of arms of austria prussia and later germany have used a black 
eagle as their national symbol the spanish catholic monarchs isabella and ferdinand used the eagle as a part of the 
royal shield representing saint john the evangelist the eagle was again on the spanish shield under the francoist regime 
and the transition to democracy the seljuk and ottoman turks both used a doubleheaded eagle in their coatsofarms during 
the s and s adolf hitlers nazi germany used a black eagle with its wings outstretched and clutching a swastika as its 
insignia notes references further reading collinson martin splitting headaches recent taxonomic changes affecting the 
british and western palaearctic lists british birds vol june external links pbs nature eagles pbs video episode american 
eagle eagle photos on oriental bird images eagle videos on the internet bird collection web of the conservation biology 
teambonellis eagle of the university of barcelona decorah eagles live webcam from the raptor resource project eaglecam 
whitebellied sea eagles live webcam at discovery centre in sydney australia