
the giant cheetah acinonyx pardinensis is an extinct species of big cat its closest living relative is the modern 
cheetah morphology the lifestyle and physical characteristics of the giant cheetah were probably similar to those of its 
modern relative except the giant cheetah was the height of a lion at the shoulder but due to its light build it weighed 
considerably less than a lion it was roughly twice the size of todays cheetahs putting it at around kg lb and about cm 
in from head to rump not including a cm in tail its reconstructed shoulder height was at cm in it was a specialized 
sprinter with long limbs just like the modern cheetah with a slightly longer back this back was highly flexible and 
allowed great propulsion during a sprint just as with the modern cheetah almost every aspect of acinonyx pardinesis was 
specialized for running the muzzle is short and the nasal passage large for increased air intake during a strenuous 
sprint to make room for the enlarged nasal passage the maxilla was reduced and the anchorage for the canine roots was 
less resulting in shorter canine roots and a shorter more stout external canine a characteristic seen in the modern 
cheetah to lighten the weight of the animal bone girth is reduced and the skeleton is lean and light excellent for 
running but not fighting or coping with injuries severe or minor its thoracic cavity was consumed by large lungs and a 
powerful heart the intestines were probably shorter to lighten the animal and muscles not used for running were reduced 
the diaphragm was connected to the movement of its gait and with the stretching phase of a stride the expansion of space 
in the abdominal cavity pulled the diaphragm down and forced the animal to inhale while the contractile phase compressed 
the lungs and forced air out so it had no control over its breathing while running a commonality of most quadruped 
sprinters it was a fragile animal that could be killed by a simple sprain if it meant the individual could not run well 
enough to hunt its tail was long probably thickly furred and relatively heavy it was used as a counterweight to aid in 
quick directional changes when chasing prey one of the most complete skulls of this species is from the wellknown french 
site of saintvallier but the best collection of postcranial bones came from the older site of perrier in the massif 
central including vertebral column and long bones of one individual were found unfortunately the metacarpals were not 
recovered so subsequent reconstructions depict them at the same length as the modern acinonyx distribution and habitat 
giant cheetahs were present in europe during the early and middle pleistocene the giant cheetah was found in germany 
france and also in china and india european cheetahs occurred alongside jaguars and leopards at some middle pleistocene 
localities and competition among the three possibly contributed to the cheetahs decline its large mass and more worn 
claws when compared to modern cheetahs suggest it was less adapted to climbing an ability that would continue to evolve 
until modernday cheetahs appeared hunting it could have preyed upon anything from small contemporary muntjac deer 
mountainous ibex and bighorn sheep to elk and possibly sambar prey that was considerably larger than the modern cheetahs 
ideal prey the thomsons gazelle the modern cheetah uses a specific hunting style seen nowhere else in the cat family on 
open plains it locates prey and walks directly towards a group or individual without crouching with head and tail down 
when it comes within suitable distance usually yards it sprints forward the chase is fast and takes many turns until the 
cheetah uses an enlarged dew claw to hook the hind leg of the prey or smack its flanks to either knock it off balance or 
damage its achilles tendon when the prey falls to the ground the cheetah suffocates it with a throat clamp and after 
resting eats as much as it can on the spot before being chased off by larger predators or occasionally having eaten all 
it can this sequence of a chase over an open area and the hooking of the back leg is unique and often necessary for the 
cheetah prey that does not flee is addressed with a great deal of confusion on the cheetahs part and is often left 
unharmed if it cannot be coaxed to flee due to the skeletal structure of acinonyx pardinensis the larger species very 
likely used a similar approach to hunting it too bore a large dew claw and the lean form was definitely built for 
running a stalk sprint trip and kill was probably a commonality of the large species hunting tactics the modern cheetah 
almost always uses a throat clamp to suffocate prey and this species of acinonyx likely used this method of killing due 
to the small canines and weaker jaw muscles of both species a muzzle clamp seen in lions or severing of the spinal cord 
seen in jaguars is generally not an option so a throat clamp would have been used most prominently lifestyle and 
behavior within the same species as shown in the modern species panthera onca the south american jaguar and panthera 
tigris the asian tiger individuals in higher and colder areas grow to larger sizes the fossil record for cheetahs is 
scarce in contrast to smilodon fatalis severe injuries lead to death and there is no sign of cooperation as seen in the 
latter species of machairodont fossils suggest a lifestyle similar to the modern cheetah species solitary except for 
mothers and cubs and possibly siblings as seen with cheetah brothers more specialized hunting tactics that narrow the 
number of species being hunted and therefore increasing the size of a territory and causing the species to be spread out 
more thinly than the much more adaptable modern panthera pardus or leopard vertebrate paleontologist alan turner 
suggests since it had the bodily proportions of the living cheetah and since running speed is a reflection of stride 
length for a given stride frequency such large animals may also have been capable of running somewhat faster than their 
living relatives although greater weight may have countered any advantage of greater size whether they needed to run 
faster is less clear the reason for a pardinensis achieving large size could be to keep warm to move faster to subdue 
larger prey or a combination of the three on the same field as the modern cheetah it would have been a relatively 
successful hunter very wary of injuries and rarely came into contact with others of its species it would have been 
cautious preferring fleeing to fighting and would have been wary of large prey capable of injuring the cheetah 
cooperative hunting would generally have been unused and mortality rates in the young would have been high the modern 
cheetah must stop running after about seconds or when its body temperature rises over f and this large species would 
have had these confines as well references 