
an octopus ktps or ktps plural octopuses octopi or octopodes see below is a cephalopod mollusc of the order octopoda it 
has two eyes and four pairs of arms and like other cephalopods it is bilaterally symmetric an octopus has a hard beak 
with its mouth at the center point of the arms an octopus has no internal or external skeleton although some species 
have a vestigial remnant of a shell inside their mantles allowing it to squeeze through tight places octopuses are among 
the most intelligent and behaviorally flexible of all invertebrates octopuses inhabit many diverse regions of the ocean 
including coral reefs pelagic waters and the ocean floor they have numerous strategies for defending themselves against 
predators including the expulsion of ink the use of camouflage and deimatic displays their ability to jet quickly 
through the water and their ability to hide an octopus trails its eight arms behind it as it swims all octopuses are 
venomous but only one group the blueringed octopus is known to be deadly to humans around species are recognized which 
is over onethird of the total number of known cephalopod species the term octopus may also be used to refer specifically 
to the genus octopus biology octopuses are characterized by their eight arms usually bearing suction cups the arms of 
octopuses are often distinguished from the pair of feeding tentacles found in squid and cuttlefish both types of limb 
are muscular hydrostats unlike most other cephalopods the majority of octopuses those in the suborder most commonly 
known incirrina have almost entirely soft bodies with no internal skeleton they have neither a protective outer shell 
like the nautilus nor any vestige of an internal shell or bones like cuttlefish or squid the beak similar in shape to a 
parrots beak and made of chitin is the only hard part of their bodies this enables them to squeeze through very narrow 
slits between underwater rocks which is very helpful when they are fleeing from moray eels or other predatory fish the 
octopuses in the lessfamiliar cirrina suborder have two fins and an internal shell generally reducing their ability to 
squeeze into small spaces these cirrate species are often freeswimming and live in deepwater habitats while incirrate 
octopus species are found in reefs and other shallower seafloor habitats octopuses have a relatively short life 
expectancy with some species living for as little as six months larger species such as the giant pacific octopus may 
live for up to five years under suitable circumstances however reproduction is a cause of death males can live for only 
a few months after mating and females die shortly after their eggs hatch they neglect to eat during the roughly onemonth 
period spent taking care of their unhatched eggs eventually dying of starvation in a scientific experiment the removal 
of both optic glands after spawning was found to result in the cessation of broodiness the resumption of feeding 
increased growth and greatly extended lifespans octopuses have three hearts two branchial hearts pump blood through each 
of the two gills while the third is a systemic heart that pumps blood through the body octopus blood contains the 
copperrich protein hemocyanin for transporting oxygen although less efficient under normal conditions than the ironrich 
hemoglobin of vertebrates in cold conditions with low oxygen pressure hemocyanin oxygen transportation is more efficient 
than hemoglobin oxygen transportation the hemocyanin is dissolved in the plasma instead of being carried within red 
blood cells and gives the blood a bluish color the octopus draws water into its mantle cavity where it passes through 
its gills as molluscs their gills are finely divided and vascularized outgrowths of either the outer or the inner body 
surface intelligence octopuses are highly intelligent possibly more so than any other order of invertebrates the exact 
extent of their intelligence and learning capability is much debated among biologists but maze and problemsolving 
experiments have shown evidence of a memory system that can store both short and longterm memory it is not known 
precisely what contribution learning makes to adult octopus behavior young octopuses learn almost no behaviors from 
their parents with whom they have very little contact an octopus has a highly complex nervous system only part of which 
is localized in its brain twothirds of an octopuss neurons are found in the nerve cords of its arms which have limited 
functional autonomy octopus arms show a variety of complex reflex actions that persist even when they have no input from 
the brain unlike vertebrates the complex motor skills of octopuses are not organized in their brain using an internal 
somatotopic map of its body instead using a nonsomatotopic system unique to largebrained invertebrates despite this 
delegation of control octopus arms do not become tangled or stuck to each other because the suction cups have chemical 
sensors that recognize octopus skin and prevent selfattachment some octopuses such as the mimic octopus will move their 
arms in ways that emulate the shape and movements of other sea creatures in laboratory experiments octopuses can be 
readily trained to distinguish between different shapes and patterns they have been reported to practice observational 
learning although the validity of these findings is widely contested on a number of grounds octopuses have also been 
observed in what some have described as play repeatedly releasing bottles or toys into a circular current in their 
aquariums and then catching them octopuses often break out of their aquariums and sometimes into others in search of 
food they have even boarded fishing boats and opened holds to eat crabs tool use the octopus has been shown to use tools 
at least four specimens of the veined octopus amphioctopus marginatus have been witnessed retrieving discarded coconut 
shells manipulating them and then reassembling them to use as shelter protective legislation due to their intelligence 
octopuses in some countries are on the list of experimental animals on which surgery may not be performed without 
anesthesia a protection usually extended only to vertebrates in the uk from to the common octopus octopus vulgaris was 
the only invertebrate protected under the animals scientific procedures act in this legislation was extended to include 
all cephalopods in accordance with a general eu directive defense an octopuss primary defense is to hide or to disguise 
itself through camouflage and mimicry octopuses have several secondary defenses defenses they use once they have been 
seen by a predator the most common secondary defense is fast escape other defenses include distraction with the use of 
ink sacs and autotomising limbs most octopuses can eject a thick blackish ink in a large cloud to aid in escaping from 
predators the main coloring agent of the ink is melanin which is the same chemical that gives humans their hair and skin 
color this ink cloud is thought to reduce the efficiency of olfactory organs which would aid an octopuss evasion from 
predators that employ smell for hunting such as sharks ink clouds of some species might serve as pseudomorphs or decoys 
that the predator attacks instead an octopuss camouflage is aided by certain specialized skin cells which can change the 
apparent color opacity and reflectivity of the epidermis chromatophores contain yellow orange red brown or black 
pigments most species have three of these colors while some have two or four other colorchanging cells are reflective 
iridophores and leucophores white this colorchanging ability can also be used to communicate with or warn other 
octopuses the highly venomous blueringed octopus becomes bright yellow with blue rings when it is provoked octopuses can 
use muscles in the skin to change the texture of their mantle to achieve a greater camouflage in some species the mantle 
can take on the spiky appearance of seaweed or the scraggly bumpy texture of a rock among other disguises however in 
some species skin anatomy is limited to relatively patternless shades of one color and limited skin texture it is 
thought that octopuses that are dayactive andor live in complex habitats such as coral reefs have evolved more complex 
skin than their nocturnal andor sanddwelling relatives when under attack some octopuses can perform arm autotomy in a 
manner similar to the way skinks and other lizards detach their tails the crawling arm serves as a distraction to 
wouldbe predators such severed arms remain sensitive to stimuli and move away from unpleasant sensations a few species 
such as the mimic octopus have a fourth defense mechanism they can combine their highly flexible bodies with their 
colorchanging ability to accurately mimic other more dangerous animals such as lionfish sea snakes and eels reproduction 
when octopuses reproduce the male uses a specialized arm called a hectocotylus to transfer spermatophores packets of 
sperm from the terminal organ of the reproductive tract the cephalopod penis into the females mantle cavity the 
hectocotylus in benthic octopuses is usually the third right arm males die within a few months of mating in some species 
the female octopus can keep the sperm alive inside her for weeks until her eggs are mature after they have been 
fertilized the female lays about eggs this figure dramatically varies between families genera species and also 
individuals senses octopuses have keen eyesight like other cephalopods they can distinguish the polarization of light 
color vision appears to vary from species to species being present in o aegina but absent in o vulgaris attached to the 
brain are two special organs called statocysts that allow the octopus to sense the orientation of its body relative to 
horizontal an autonomic response keeps the octopuss eyes oriented so the pupil slit is always horizontal octopuses also 
have an excellent sense of touch an octopuss suction cups are equipped with chemoreceptors so the octopus can taste what 
it is touching the arms contain tension sensors so the octopus knows whether its arms are stretched out however it has a 
very poor proprioceptive sense the tension receptors are not sufficient for the brain to determine the position of the 
octopuss body or arms it is not clear whether the octopus brain would be capable of processing the large amount of 
information that this would require the flexibility of an octopuss arms is much greater than that of the limbs of 
vertebrates which devote large areas of cerebral cortex to the processing of proprioceptive inputs as a result the 
octopus does not possess stereognosis that is it does not form a mental image of the overall shape of the object it is 
handling it can detect local texture variations but cannot integrate the information into a larger picture the 
neurological autonomy of the arms means the octopus has great difficulty learning about the detailed effects of its 
motions the brain may issue a highlevel command to the arms but the nerve cords in the arms execute the details there is 
no neurological path for the brain to receive proprioceptive feedback about just how its command was executed by the 
arms the only way it knows just what motions were made is by observing the arms visually ie exteroception octopuses 
might use the statocyst a saclike structure containing a mineralised mass and sensitive hairs to register sound the 
common octopus can hear sounds between hz and hz and hears best at a frequency of hz locomotion octopuses move about by 
crawling or swimming their main means of slow travel is crawling with some swimming jet propulsion is their fastest 
means of locomotion followed by swimming and walking they crawl by walking on their arms usually on many at once on both 
solid and soft surfaces while supported in water in some octopuses adopus aculeatus and amphioctopus marginatus under 
current taxonomy were found to walk on two arms while at the same time resembling plant matter this form of locomotion 
allows these octopuses to move quickly away from a potential predator while possibly not triggering that predators 
search image for octopus food a study of this behavior conducted by the weymouth sea life centre led to the suggestion 
that the two rearmost appendages may be more accurately termed legs rather than arms some species of octopus can crawl 
out of the water for a short period which they may do between tide pools while hunting crustaceans or gastropods or to 
escape predators octopuses swim by expelling a jet of water from a contractile mantle and aiming it via a muscular 
siphon diet bottomdwelling octopuses eat mainly crabs polychaete worms and other molluscs such as whelks and clams 
openocean octopuses eat mainly prawns fish and other cephalopods they usually inject their prey with a paralysing saliva 
before dismembering it into small pieces with their beaks octopuses feed on shelled molluscs either by using force or by 
drilling a hole in the shell injecting a secretion into the hole and then extracting the soft body of the mollusc large 
octopuses have also been known to catch and kill some species of sharks seabirds have also been documented as prey size 
the giant pacific octopus enteroctopus dofleini is often cited as the largest octopus species adults usually weigh 
around kg lb with an arm span of up to m ft the largest specimen of this species to be scientifically documented was an 
animal with a live mass of kg lb the alternative contender is the sevenarm octopus haliphron atlanticus based on a kg lb 
carcass estimated to have a live mass of kg lb however a number of questionable size records would suggest e dofleini is 
the largest of all octopus species by a considerable margin one such record is of a specimen weighing kg lb and having 
an arm span of m ft etymology and pluralization the term octopus is derived through scientific latin from ancient greek 
eightfooted eight and foot ancient greek also had the form which would give octapus in english cf modern greek the usual 
plural in english is octopuses pronounced ktpsz but the greek plural form octopodes pronounced ktpdiz is sometimes used 
though less frequently than in the past the form octopi as if the word were a latin seconddeclension noun is generally 
considered incorrect but is in fact used so that it is registered by the descriptivist merriamwebster th collegiate 
dictionary which lists octopuses and octopi in that order and websters new world college dictionary which lists plurals 
in the order octopuses octopi and octopodes the oxford english dictionary draft revision also lists octopuses octopi and 
octopodes in that order labelling octopodes as rare and noting that octopi derives from the misapprehension that octpus 
is a seconddeclension latin noun and stating that if the word were native to latin it would be third declension octps 
plural octpedes after the pattern of ps foot plural peds the new oxford american dictionary rd edition lists only 
octopuses as being the acceptable pluralization with a usage note indicating octopodes as being still occasionally used 
and octopi as being incorrect related to the word octopus are the term octopoda the taxonomic order of cephalopod 
molluscs that comprises the octopuses and the adjective octopoid relationship to humans ancient peoples of the 
mediterranean were aware of the octopus as evidenced by certain artworks and designs of prehistory for example a stone 
carving found in the archaeological recovery from bronze age minoan crete at knossos bc has a depiction of a fisherman 
carrying an octopus in classical greece aristotle bc bc commented on the colourchanging abilities of the octopus both 
for camouflage and for signalling in his historia animalium the octopus seeks its prey by so changing its colour as to 
render it like the colour of the stones adjacent to it it does so also when alarmed octopuses were often depicted in the 
art of the moche people of ancient peru who worshipped the sea and its animals in mythology the gorgon of greek 
mythology has been thought to have been inspired by the octopus or squid the octopus itself representing the severed 
head of medusa the beak as the protruding tongue and fangs and its tentacles as the snakes the kraken are legendary sea 
monsters of giant proportions said to dwell off the coasts of norway and greenland usually portrayed in art as a giant 
octopus attacking ships the hawaiian creation myth relates that the present cosmos is only the last of a series having 
arisen in stages from the wreck of the previous universe in this account the octopus is the lone survivor of the 
previous alien universe akkorokamui is a gigantic octopuslike monster from ainu folklore which supposedly lurks in funka 
bay in hokkaid and has been sighted in several locations including taiwan and korea since the th century in literature 
the octopus has a significant role in victor hugos book travailleurs de la mer toilers of the sea ian flemings short 
story collection octopussy and the living daylights and the james bond film partly inspired by hugos book in john 
steinbecks novella sweet thursday the marine biologist doc is studying what the denizens of cannery row call devilfish 
docs study of octopuses to ascertain whether their behavior displays emotional responses similar to humans such as 
apoplexy is a major plot device in the novella ed ricketts the marine biologist who was steinbecks friend and 
inspiration for the character doc had an octopus as a trademark for products sold by his pacific biological laboratories 
ringo starr wrote a childrens book based on his song octopuss garden the book is illustrated by ben court as a metaphor 
due to having numerous arms that emanate from a common center the octopus is often used as a metaphor for a group or 
organization that is perceived as being powerful manipulative or bent on domination use of this terminology is 
invariably negative and employed by the opponents of the groups or institutions so described as food octopus is eaten in 
many cultures the arms and sometimes other body parts are prepared in various ways often varying by species or geography 
as pets though octopuses can be difficult to keep in captivity some people keep them as pets they often escape even from 
supposedly secure tanks due to their problemsolving skills mobility and lack of rigid structure the variation in size 
and lifespan among octopus species makes it difficult to know how long a new specimen can naturally be expected to live 
that is a small octopus may be just born or may be an adult depending on its species by selecting a wellknown species 
such as the california twospot octopus one can choose a small octopus around the size of a tennis ball and be confident 
it is young with a full life ahead of it classification class cephalopoda subclass nautiloidea nautilus subclass 
coleoidea superorder decapodiformes squid cuttlefish superorder octopodiformes family trachyteuthididae incertae sedis 
order vampyromorphida vampire squid order octopoda genus keuppia incertae sedis genus palaeoctopus incertae sedis genus 
paleocirroteuthis incertae sedis genus pohlsepia incertae sedis genus proteroctopus incertae sedis genus styletoctopus 
incertae sedis suborder cirrina finned deepsea octopus family opisthoteuthidae umbrella octopus family cirroteuthidae 
family stauroteuthidae suborder incirrina family amphitretidae telescope octopus family bolitaenidae gelatinous octopus 
family octopodidae benthic octopus genus enteroctopus giant octopus family vitreledonellidae glass octopus superfamily 
argonautoida family alloposidae sevenarm octopus family argonautidae argonauts family ocythoidae tuberculate pelagic 
octopus family tremoctopodidae blanket octopus see also henry the hexapus a sixarmed octopus legend of the octopus 
octopus wrestling paralarva paul the octopus famous for predicting football results in the fifa world cup references 
external links the cephalopod page tonmocom the octopus news magazine online tree of life website information about 
cephalopods along with pictures and videos discussion about the plural an octopuss shark encounter footage of an octopus 
eating a shark also in quicktime format camouflage in action video showing an octopus escaping through a inch mm hole 
bipedal octopuses video information original paper why cephalopods change color pdf kb video of walking 
octopuses