sheep ovis aries are quadrupedal ruminant mammals typically kept as livestock like all ruminants sheep are members of 
the order artiodactyla the eventoed ungulates although the name sheep applies to many species in the genus ovis in 
everyday usage it almost always refers to ovis aries numbering a little over one billion domestic sheep are also the 
most numerous species of sheep an adult female sheep is referred to as a ewe ju an intact male as a ram or occasionally 
a tup a castrated male as a wether and a younger sheep as a lamb sheep are most likely descended from the wild mouflon 
of europe and asia one of the earliest animals to be domesticated for agricultural purposes sheep are raised for fleece 
meat lamb hogget or mutton and milk a sheeps wool is the most widely used animal fiber and is usually harvested by 
shearing ovine meat is called lamb when from younger animals and mutton when from older ones sheep continue to be 
important for wool and meat today and are also occasionally raised for pelts as dairy animals or as model organisms for 
science sheep husbandry is practised throughout the majority of the inhabited world and has been fundamental to many 
civilizations in the modern era australia new zealand the southern and central south american nations and the british 
isles are most closely associated with sheep production sheepraising has a large lexicon of unique terms which vary 
considerably by region and dialect use of the word sheep began in middle english as a derivation of the old english word 
scap it is both the singular and plural name for the animal a group of sheep is called a flock herd or mob many other 
specific terms for the various life stages of sheep exist generally related to lambing shearing and age being a key 
animal in the history of farming sheep have a deeply entrenched place in human culture and find representation in much 
modern language and symbology as livestock sheep are most often associated with pastoral arcadian imagery sheep figure 
in many mythologiessuch as the golden fleeceand major religions especially the abrahamic traditions in both ancient and 
modern religious ritual sheep are used as sacrificial animals description and evolution domestic sheep are relatively 
small ruminants usually with a crimped hair called wool and often with horns forming a lateral spiral domestic sheep 
differ from their wild relatives and ancestors in several respects having become uniquely neotenic as a result of 
selective breeding by humans a few primitive breeds of sheep retain some of the characteristics of their wild cousins 
such as short tails depending on breed domestic sheep may have no horns at all ie polled or horns in both sexes or in 
males only most horned breeds have a single pair but a few breeds may have several another trait unique to domestic 
sheep as compared to wild ovines is their wide variation in color wild sheep are largely variations of brown hues and 
variation within species is extremely limited colors of domestic sheep range from pure white to dark chocolate brown and 
even spotted or piebald selection for easily dyeable white fleeces began early in sheep domestication and as white wool 
is a dominant trait it spread quickly however colored sheep do appear in many modern breeds and may even appear as a 
recessive trait in white flocks while white wool is desirable for large commercial markets there is a niche market for 
colored fleeces mostly for handspinning the nature of the fleece varies widely among the breeds from dense and highly 
crimped to long and hairlike there is variation of wool type and quality even among members of the same flock so wool 
classing is a step in the commercial processing of the fibre depending on breed sheep show a range of heights and 
weights their rate of growth and mature weight is a heritable trait that is often selected for in breeding ewes 
typically weigh between and kilograms and lb and rams between and kilograms and lb when all deciduous teeth have erupted 
the sheep has teeth mature sheep have teeth as with other ruminants the front teeth in the lower jaw bite against a hard 
toothless pad in the upper jaw these are used to pick off vegetation then the rear teeth grind it before it is swallowed 
there are eight lower front teeth in ruminants but there is some disagreement as to whether these are eight incisors or 
six incisors and two incisorshaped canines this means that the dental formula for sheep is either or there is a large 
diastema between the incisors and the molars for the first few years of life it is possible to calculate the age of 
sheep from their front teeth as a pair of milk teeth is replaced by larger adult teeth each year the full set of eight 
adult front teeth being complete at about four years of age the front teeth are then gradually lost as sheep age making 
it harder for them to feed and hindering the health and productivity of the animal for this reason domestic sheep on 
normal pasture begin to slowly decline from four years on and the average life expectancy of a sheep is to years though 
some sheep may live as long as years sheep have good hearing and are sensitive to noise when being handled sheep have 
horizontal slitshaped pupils possessing excellent peripheral vision with visual fields of approximately to sheep can see 
behind themselves without turning their heads many breeds have only short hair on the face and some have facial wool if 
any confined to the poll and or the area of the mandibular angle the wide angles of peripheral vision apply to these 
breeds a few breeds tend to have considerable wool on the face for some individuals of these breeds peripheral vision 
may be greatly reduced by wool blindness unless recently shorn about the face sheep have poor depth perception shadows 
and dips in the ground may cause sheep to baulk in general sheep have a tendency to move out of the dark and into well 
lit areas and prefer to move uphill when disturbed sheep also have an excellent sense of smell and like all species of 
their genus have scent glands just in front of the eyes and interdigitally on the feet the purpose of these glands is 
uncertain but those on the face may be used in breeding behaviors the foot glands might also be related to reproduction 
but alternative reasons such as secretion of a waste product or a scent marker to help lost sheep find their flock have 
also been proposed sheep compared to goats sheep and goats are closely related as both are in the subfamily caprinae 
however they are separate species so hybrids rarely occur and are always infertile a hybrid of a ewe and a buck a male 
goat is called a sheepgoat hybrid only a single such animal has been confirmed and is not to be confused with the 
sheepgoat chimera though both are known as geep visual differences between sheep and goats include the beard of goats 
and divided upper lip of sheep sheep tails also hang down even when short or docked while the short tails of goats are 
held upwards sheep breeds are also often naturally polled either in both sexes or just in the female while naturally 
polled goats are rare though many are polled artificially males of the two species differ in that buck goats acquire a 
unique and strong odor during the rut whereas rams do not breeds the domestic sheep is a multipurpose animal and the 
more than breeds now in existence were created to serve these diverse purposes some sources give a count of a thousand 
or more breeds but these numbers cannot be verified according to some sources however several hundred breeds of sheep 
have been identified by the fao food and agriculture organization of the un with the estimated number varying somewhat 
from time to time eg breeds as of breeds as of and breeds as of these numbers exclude extinct breeds which are also 
tallied by the fao for purposes of such tallies the fao definition of a breed is either a subspecific group of domestic 
livestock with definable and identifiable external characteristics that enable it to be separated by visual appraisal 
from other similarly defined groups within the same species or a group for which geographical andor cultural separation 
from phenotypically similar groups has led to acceptance of its separate identity almost all sheep are classified as 
being best suited to furnishing a certain product wool meat milk hides or a combination in a dualpurpose breed other 
features used when classifying sheep include face color generally white or black tail length presence or lack of horns 
and the topography for which the breed has been developed this last point is especially stressed in the uk where breeds 
are described as either upland hill or mountain or lowland breeds a sheep may also be of a fattailed type which is a 
dualpurpose sheep common in africa and asia with larger deposits of fat within and around its tail breeds are often 
categorized by the type of their wool fine wool breeds are those that have wool of great crimp and density which are 
preferred for textiles most of these were derived from merino sheep and the breed continues to dominate the world sheep 
industry downs breeds have wool between the extremes and are typically fastgrowing meat and ram breeds with dark faces 
some major medium wool breeds such as the corriedale are dualpurpose crosses of long and finewooled breeds and were 
created for highproduction commercial flocks long wool breeds are the largest of sheep with long wool and a slow rate of 
growth long wool sheep are most valued for crossbreeding to improve the attributes of other sheep types for example the 
american columbia breed was developed by crossing lincoln rams a long wool breed with finewooled rambouillet ewes coarse 
or carpet wool sheep are those with a medium to long length wool of characteristic coarseness breeds traditionally used 
for carpet wool show great variability but the chief requirement is a wool that will not break down under heavy use as 
would that of the finer breeds as the demand for carpetquality wool declines some breeders of this type of sheep are 
attempting to use a few of these traditional breeds for alternative purposes others have always been primarily meatclass 
sheep a minor class of sheep are the dairy breeds dualpurpose breeds that may primarily be meat or wool sheep are often 
used secondarily as milking animals but there are a few breeds that are predominantly used for milking these sheep do 
produce a higher quantity of milk and have slightly longer lactation curves in the quality of their milk fat and protein 
content percentages of dairy sheep vary from nondairy breeds but lactose content does not a last group of sheep breeds 
is that of fur or hair sheep which do not grow wool at all hair sheep are similar to the early domesticated sheep kept 
before woolly breeds were developed and are raised for meat and pelts some modern breeds of hair sheep such as the 
dorper result from crosses between wool and hair breeds for meat and hide producers hair sheep are cheaper to keep as 
they do not need shearing hair sheep are also more resistant to parasites and hot weather with the modern rise of 
corporate agribusiness and the decline of localized family farms many breeds of sheep are in danger of extinction the 
rare breeds survival trust of the uk lists native breeds as having only registered animals each and the livestock 
conservancy lists as either critical or threatened preferences for breeds with uniform characteristics and fast growth 
have pushed heritage or heirloom breeds to the margins of the sheep industry those that remain are maintained through 
the efforts of conservation organizations breed registries and individual farmers dedicated to their preservation diet 
sheep are exclusively herbivorous mammals most breeds prefer to graze on grass and other short roughage avoiding the 
taller woody parts of plants that goats readily consume both sheep and goats use their lips and tongues to select parts 
of the plant that are easier to digest or higher in nutrition sheep however graze well in monoculture pastures where 
most goats fare poorly like all ruminants sheep have a complex digestive system composed of four chambers allowing them 
to break down cellulose from stems leaves and seed hulls into simpler carbohydrates when sheep graze vegetation is 
chewed into a mass called a bolus which is then passed into the rumen via the reticulum the rumen is a to liter to gal 
organ in which feed is fermented the fermenting organisms include bacteria fungi and protozoa other important rumen 
organisms include some archaea which produce methane from carbon dioxide the bolus is periodically regurgitated back to 
the mouth as cud for additional chewing and salivation cud chewing is an adaptation allowing ruminants to graze more 
quickly in the morning and then fully chew and digest feed later in the day this is safer than grazing which requires 
lowering the head thus leaving the animal vulnerable to predators while cud chewing does not other than forage the other 
staple feed for sheep is hay often during the winter months the ability to thrive solely on pasture even without hay 
varies with breed but all sheep can survive on this diet also included in some sheeps diets are minerals either in a 
trace mix or in licks grazing behavior sheep follow a diurnal pattern of activity feeding from dawn to dusk stopping 
sporadically to rest and chew their cud ideal pasture for sheep is not lawnlike grass but an array of grasses legumes 
and forbs types of land where sheep are raised vary widely from pastures that are seeded and improved intentionally to 
rough native lands common plants toxic to sheep are present in most of the world and include but are not limited to 
cherry some oaks and acorns tomato yew rhubarb potato and rhododendron effects on pasture sheep are largely grazing 
herbivores unlike browsing animals such as goats and deer that prefer taller foliage with a much narrower face sheep 
crop plants very close to the ground and can overgraze a pasture much faster than cattle for this reason many shepherds 
use managed intensive rotational grazing where a flock is rotated through multiple pastures giving plants time to 
recover paradoxically sheep can both cause and solve the spread of invasive plant species by disturbing the natural 
state of pasture sheep and other livestock can pave the way for invasive plants however sheep also prefer to eat 
invasives such as cheatgrass leafy spurge kudzu and spotted knapweed over native species such as sagebrush making 
grazing sheep effective for conservation grazing research conducted in imperial county california compared lamb grazing 
with herbicides for weed control in seedling alfalfa fields three trials demonstrated that grazing lambs were just as 
effective as herbicides in controlling winter weeds entomologists also compared grazing lambs to insecticides for insect 
control in winter alfalfa in this trial lambs provided insect control as effectively as insecticides rumination during 
fermentation the rumen produces gas that must be expelled disturbances of the organ such as sudden changes in a sheeps 
diet can cause the potentially fatal condition of bloat when gas becomes trapped in the rumen due to reflex closure of 
the caudal esophageal sphincter when in contact with foam or liquid after fermentation in the rumen feed passes into the 
reticulum and the omasum special feeds such as grains may bypass the rumen altogether after the first three chambers 
food moves into the abomasum for final digestion before processing by the intestines the abomasum is the only one of the 
four chambers analogous to the human stomach and is sometimes called the true stomach concentrated diets sheep are one 
of the few livestock animals raised for meat today that have rarely been raised in an intensive confined animal feeding 
operation cafo although there is a growing movement advocating alternative farming styles a large percentage of beef 
cattle pigs and poultry are still produced under such conditions in contrast only some sheep are regularly given 
highconcentration grain feed much less kept in confinement especially in industrialized countries sheep producers may 
fatten market lambs before slaughter called finishing in feedlots many sheep breeders flush ewes and rams with a daily 
ration of grain during breeding to increase fertility ewes may be flushed during pregnancy to increase birth weights as 
of a lambs growth occurs in the last five to six weeks of gestation however overfeeding of ewe hoggets ie adolescent 
ewes in early pregnancy can result in restricted placental development restricting growth of fetal lambs in late 
pregnancy otherwise only lactating ewes and especially old or infirm sheep are commonly provided with grain feed 
provided to sheep must be specially formulated as most cattle poultry pig and even some goat feeds contain levels of 
copper that are lethal to sheep the same danger applies to mineral supplements such as salt licks behavior flock 
behavior sheep are flock animals and strongly gregarious much sheep behavior can be understood on the basis of these 
tendencies the dominance hierarchy of sheep and their natural inclination to follow a leader to new pastures were the 
pivotal factors in sheep being one of the first domesticated livestock species furthermore in contrast to the red deer 
and gazelle two other ungulates of primary importance to meat production in prehistoric times sheep do not defend 
territories although they do form home ranges all sheep have a tendency to congregate close to other members of a flock 
although this behavior varies with breed and sheep can become stressed when separated from their flock members during 
flocking sheep have a strong tendency to follow and a leader may simply be the first individual to move relationships in 
flocks tend to be closest among related sheep in mixedbreed flocks subgroups of the same breed tend to form and a ewe 
and her direct descendants often move as a unit within large flocks sheep can become hefted to one particular local 
pasture heft so they do not roam freely in unfenced landscapes lambs learn the heft from ewes and if whole flocks are 
culled it must be retaught to the replacement animals flock behaviour in sheep is generally only exhibited in groups of 
four or more sheep fewer sheep may not react as expected when alone or with few other sheep being a prey species the 
primary defense mechanism of sheep is to flee from danger when their flight zone is entered cornered sheep may charge 
and butt or threaten by hoof stamping and adopting an aggressive posture this is particularly true for ewes with newborn 
lambs in regions where sheep have no natural predators none of the native breeds of sheep exhibit a strong flocking 
behavior herding farmers exploit flocking behavior to keep sheep together on unfenced pastures such as hill farming and 
to move them more easily shepherds may also use herding dogs in this effort whose highly bred herding ability can assist 
in moving flocks sheep are foodoriented and association of humans with regular feeding often results in sheep soliciting 
people for food those who are moving sheep may exploit this behavior by leading sheep with buckets of feed rather than 
forcing their movements with herding dominance hierarchy sheep establish a dominance hiererachy through fighting threats 
and competitiveness dominant animals are inclined to be more aggressive with other sheep and usually feed first at 
troughs primarily among rams horn size is a factor in the flock hierarchy rams with different size horns may be less 
inclined to fight to establish the dominance order while rams with similarly sized horns are more so merinos have an 
almost linear hierarchy whereas there is a less rigid structure in border leicesters when a competitive feeding 
situation arises in sheep position in a moving flock is highly correlated with social dominance but there is no 
definitive study to show consistent voluntary leadership by an individual sheep intelligence and learning ability sheep 
are frequently thought of as unintelligent animals their flocking behavior and quickness to flee and panic can make 
shepherding a difficult endeavor for the uninitiated despite these perceptions a university of illinois monograph on 
sheep reported them to be just below pigs and on par with cattle in iq sheep can recognize individual human and ovine 
faces and remember them for years in addition to longterm facial recognition of individuals sheep can also differentiate 
emotional states through facial characteristics if worked with patiently sheep may learn their names and many sheep are 
trained to be led by halter for showing and other purposes sheep have also responded well to clicker training sheep have 
been used as pack animals tibetan nomads distribute baggage equally throughout a flock as it is herded between living 
sites it has been reported that some sheep have apparently shown problemsolving abilities a flock in west yorkshire 
england allegedly found a way to get over cattle grids by rolling on their backs although documentation of this has 
relied on anecdotal accounts vocalisations sounds made by domestic sheep include bleats grunts rumbles and snorts 
bleating baaing is used mostly for contact communication especially between dam and lambs but also at times between 
other flock members the bleats of individual sheep are distinctive enabling the ewe and her lambs to recognize each 
others vocalizations vocal communication between lambs and their dam declines to a very low level within several weeks 
after parturition a variety of bleats may be heard depending on sheep age and circumstances apart from contact 
communication bleating may signal distress frustration or impatience however sheep are usually silent when in pain 
isolation commonly prompts bleating by sheep pregnant ewes may grunt when in labor rumbling sounds are made by the ram 
during courting somewhat similar rumbling sounds may be made by the ewe especially when with her neonate lambs a snort 
explosive exhalation through the nostrils may signal aggression or a warning and is often elicited from startled sheep 
senses sheep have panoramic vision of to and binocular vision of to they are thought to have colour vision and are able 
to distinguish between a variety of colours black red brown green yellow and white they have no accommodation so must 
lift their head to see distant objects this also means that they are unable to judge depth as accurately as some other 
animals sheep eyes possess very low hyperopia with little astigmatism such visual characteristics are likely to produce 
a wellfocused retinal image of objects in both the middle and long distance sight is a vital part of sheep communication 
and when grazing they maintain visual contact with each other each sheep lifts its head upwards to check the position of 
other sheep in the flock this constant monitoring is probably what keeps the sheep in a flock as they move along grazing 
sheep become stressed when isolated this stress is reduced if they are provided with a mirror indicating that the sight 
of other sheep has stressreducing properties taste is the most important sense in sheep establishing forage preferences 
with sweet and sour plants being preferred and bitter plants being more commonly rejected touch and sight are also 
important in relation to specific plant characteristics such as succulence and growth form the ram uses his vomeronasal 
organ sometimes called the jacobsons organ for sensing the pheromones of ewes and detecting when they are in estrus the 
ewe uses her vomeronasal organ for early recognition of her neonate lamb reproduction sheep follow a similar 
reproductive strategy to other herd animals a group of ewes is generally mated by a single ram who has either been 
chosen by a breeder or has established dominance through physical contest with other rams in feral populations most 
sheep are seasonal breeders although some are able to breed yearround ewes generally reach sexual maturity at six to 
eight months of age and rams generally at four to six months however there are exceptions for example finnsheep ewe 
lambs may reach puberty as early as to months and merino ewes sometimes reach puberty at to months ewes have estrus 
cycles about every days during which they emit a scent and indicate readiness through physical displays towards rams a 
minority of rams display a preference for homosexuality on average and a small number of the females that were 
accompanied by a male fetus in utero are freemartins female animals that are behaviorally masculine and lack functioning 
ovaries in feral sheep rams may fight during the rut to determine which individuals may mate with ewes rams especially 
unfamiliar ones will also fight outside the breeding period to establish dominance rams can kill one another if allowed 
to mix freely during the rut even normally friendly rams may become aggressive towards humans due to increases in their 
hormone levels after mating sheep have a gestation period of about five months and normal labor takes one to three hours 
although some breeds regularly throw larger litters of lambs most produce single or twin lambs during or soon after 
labor ewes and lambs may be confined to small lambing jugs small pens designed to aid both careful observation of ewes 
and to cement the bond between them and their lambs ovine obstetrics can be problematic by selectively breeding ewes 
that produce multiple offspring with higher birth weights for generations sheep producers have inadvertently caused some 
domestic sheep to have difficulty lambing balancing ease of lambing with high productivity is one of the dilemmas of 
sheep breeding in the case of any such problems those present at lambing may assist the ewe by extracting or 
repositioning lambs after the birth ewes ideally break the amniotic sac if it is not broken during labor and begin 
licking clean the lamb most lambs will begin standing within an hour of birth in normal situations lambs nurse after 
standing receiving vital colostrum milk lambs that either fail to nurse or that are rejected by the ewe require aid to 
live such as bottlefeeding or fostering by another ewe after lambs are several weeks old lamb marking the process of ear 
tagging docking and castrating is carried out vaccinations are usually carried out at this point as well ear tags with 
numbers are attached or ear marks are applied for ease of later identification of sheep castration is performed on ram 
lambs not intended for breeding although some shepherds choose to avoid the procedure for ethical economic or practical 
reasons however many would disagree with regard to timing docking and castration are commonly done after hours to avoid 
interference with maternal bonding and consumption of colostrum and are often done not later than one week after birth 
to minimize pain stress recovery time and complications the first course of vaccinations commonly anticlostridial is 
commonly given at an age of about to weeks ie when the concentration of maternal antibodies passively acquired via 
colostrum is expected to have fallen low enough to permit development of active immunity ewes are often revaccinated 
annually about weeks before lambing to provide high antibody concentrations in colostrum during the first several hours 
after lambing ram lambs that will either be slaughtered or separated from ewes before sexual maturity are not usually 
castrated tail docking is commonly done for welfare having been shown to reduce risk of fly strike objections to all 
these procedures have been raised by animal rights groups but farmers defend them by saying they solve many practical 
and veterinary problems and inflict only temporary pain health sheep may fall victim to poisons infectious diseases and 
physical injuries as a prey species a sheeps system is adapted to hide the obvious signs of illness to prevent being 
targeted by predators however some signs of ill health are obvious with sick sheep eating little vocalizing excessively 
and being generally listless throughout history much of the money and labor of sheep husbandry has aimed to prevent 
sheep ailments historically shepherds often created remedies by experimentation on the farm in some developed countries 
including the united states sheep lack the economic importance for drug companies to perform expensive clinical trials 
required to approve more than a relatively limited number of drugs for ovine use however extralabel drug use in sheep 
production is permitted in many jurisdictions subject to certain restrictions in the us for example regulations 
governing extralabel drug use in animals are found in cfr code of federal regulations part in the th and st centuries a 
minority of sheep owners have turned to alternative treatments such as homeopathy herbalism and even traditional chinese 
medicine to treat sheep veterinary problems despite some favorable anecdotal evidence the effectiveness of alternative 
veterinary medicine has been met with skepticism in scientific journals the need for traditional antiparasite drugs and 
antibiotics is widespread and is the main impediment to certified organic farming with sheep many breeders take a 
variety of preventive measures to ward off problems the first is to ensure all sheep are healthy when purchased many 
buyers avoid outlets known to be clearing houses for animals culled from healthy flocks as either sick or simply 
inferior this can also mean maintaining a closed flock and quarantining new sheep for a month two fundamental preventive 
programs are maintaining good nutrition and reducing stress in the sheep restraint isolation loud noises novel 
situations pain heat extreme cold fatigue and other stressors can lead to secretion of cortisol a stress hormone in 
amounts that may indicate welfare problems excessive stress can compromise the immune system shipping fever pneumonic 
mannheimiosis formerly called pasteurellosis is a disease of particular concern that can occur as a result of stress 
notably during transport and or handling pain fear and several other stressors can cause secretion of epinephrine 
adrenaline considerable epinephrine secretion in the final days before slaughter can adversely affect meat quality by 
causing glycogenolysis removing the substrate for normal postslaughter acidification of meat and result in meat becoming 
more susceptible to colonization by spoilage bacteria because of such issues lowstress handling is essential in sheep 
management avoiding poisoning is also important common poisons are pesticide sprays inorganic fertilizer motor oil as 
well as radiator coolant containing ethylene glycol common forms of preventive medication for sheep are vaccinations and 
treatments for parasites both external and internal parasites are the most prevalent malady in sheep and are either 
fatal or reduce the productivity of flocks worms are the most common internal parasites they are ingested during grazing 
incubate within the sheep and are expelled through the digestive system beginning the cycle again oral antiparasitic 
medicines known as drenches are given to a flock to treat worms sometimes after worm eggs in the feces has been counted 
to assess infestation levels afterwards sheep may be moved to a new pasture to avoid ingesting the same parasites 
external sheep parasites include lice for different parts of the body sheep keds nose bots sheep itch mites and maggots 
keds are bloodsucking parasites that cause general malnutrition and decreased productivity but are not fatal maggots are 
those of the bot fly and the blowfly fly maggots cause the extremely destructive condition of flystrike flies lay their 
eggs in wounds or wet manuresoiled wool when the maggots hatch they burrow into a sheeps flesh eventually causing death 
if untreated in addition to other treatments crutching shearing wool from a sheeps rump is a common preventive method 
some countries allow mulesing a practice that involves stripping away the skin on the rump to prevent flystrike normally 
performed when the sheep is a lamb nose bots are fly larvae that inhabit a sheeps sinuses causing breathing difficulties 
and discomfort common signs are a discharge from the nasal passage sneezing and frantic movement such as head shaking 
external parasites may be controlled through the use of backliners sprays or immersive sheep dips a wide array of 
bacterial and viral diseases affect sheep diseases of the hoof such as foot rot and foot scald may occur and are treated 
with footbaths and other remedies these painful conditions cause lameness and hinder feeding ovine johnes disease is a 
wasting disease that affects young sheep bluetongue disease is an insectborne illness causing fever and inflammation of 
the mucous membranes ovine rinderpest or peste des petits ruminants is a highly contagious and often fatal viral disease 
affecting sheep and goats a few sheep conditions are transmissible to humans orf also known as scabby mouth contagious 
ecthyma or soremouth is a skin disease leaving lesions that is transmitted through skintoskin contact cutaneous anthrax 
is also called woolsorters disease as the spores can be transmitted in unwashed wool more seriously the organisms that 
can cause spontaneous enzootic abortion in sheep are easily transmitted to pregnant women also of concern are the prion 
disease scrapie and the virus that causes footandmouth disease fmd as both can devastate flocks the latter poses a 
slight risk to humans during the fmd pandemic in the uk hundreds of sheep were culled and some rare british breeds were 
at risk of extinction due to this predation other than parasites and disease predation is a threat to sheep and the 
profitability of sheep raising sheep have little ability to defend themselves compared with other species kept as 
livestock even if sheep survive an attack they may die from their injuries or simply from panic however the impact of 
predation varies dramatically with region in africa australia the americas and parts of europe and asia predators are a 
serious problem in the united states for instance over one third of sheep deaths in were caused by predation in contrast 
other nations are virtually devoid of sheep predators particularly islands known for extensive sheep husbandry worldwide 
canidsincluding the domestic dogare responsible for most sheep deaths other animals that occasionally prey on sheep 
include felines bears birds of prey ravens and feral hogs sheep producers have used a wide variety of measures to combat 
predation premodern shepherds used their own presence livestock guardian dogs and protective structures such as barns 
and fencing fencing both regular and electric penning sheep at night and lambing indoors all continue to be widely used 
more modern shepherds used guns traps and poisons to kill predators causing significant decreases in predator 
populations in the wake of the environmental and conservation movements the use of these methods now usually falls under 
the purview of specially designated government agencies in most developed countries the s saw a resurgence in the use of 
livestock guardian dogs and the development of new methods of predator control by sheep producers many of them nonlethal 
donkeys and guard llamas have been used since the s in sheep operations using the same basic principle as livestock 
guardian dogs interspecific pasturing usually with larger livestock such as cattle or horses may help to deter predators 
even if such species do not actively guard sheep in addition to animal guardians contemporary sheep operations may use 
nonlethal predator deterrents such as motionactivated lights and noisy alarms economic importance sheep are an important 
part of the global agricultural economy however their once vital status has been largely replaced by other livestock 
species especially the pig chicken and cow china australia india and iran have the largest modern flocks and serve both 
local and exportation needs for wool and mutton other countries such as new zealand have smaller flocks but retain a 
large international economic impact due to their export of sheep products sheep also play a major role in many local 
economies which may be niche markets focused on organic or sustainable agriculture and local food customers especially 
in developing countries such flocks may be a part of subsistence agriculture rather than a system of trade sheep 
themselves may be a medium of trade in barter economies domestic sheep provide a wide array of raw materials wool was 
one of the first textiles although in the late th century wool prices began to fall dramatically as the result of the 
popularity and cheap prices for synthetic fabrics for many sheep owners the cost of shearing is greater than the 
possible profit from the fleece making subsisting on wool production alone practically impossible without farm subsidies 
fleeces are used as material in making alternative products such as wool insulation in the st century the sale of meat 
is the most profitable enterprise in the sheep industry even though far less sheep meat is consumed than chicken pork or 
beef sheepskin is likewise used for making clothes footwear rugs and other products byproducts from the slaughter of 
sheep are also of value sheep tallow can be used in candle and soap making sheep bone and cartilage has been used to 
furnish carved items such as dice and buttons as well as rendered glue and gelatin sheep intestine can be formed into 
sausage casings and lamb intestine has been formed into surgical sutures as well as strings for musical instruments and 
tennis rackets sheep droppings which are high in cellulose have even been sterilized and mixed with traditional pulp 
materials to make paper of all sheep byproducts perhaps the most valuable is lanolin the waterproof fatty substance 
found naturally in sheeps wool and used as a base for innumerable cosmetics and other products some farmers who keep 
sheep also make a profit from live sheep providing lambs for youth programs such as h and competition at agricultural 
shows is often a dependable avenue for the sale of sheep farmers may also choose to focus on a particular breed of sheep 
in order to sell registered purebred animals as well as provide a ram rental service for breeding the most valuable 
sheep ever sold to date was a purebred texel ram that fetched at auction the previous record holder was a merino ram 
sold for in a new option for deriving profit from live sheep is the rental of flocks for grazing these mowing services 
are hired in order to keep unwanted vegetation down in public spaces and to lessen fire hazard despite the falling 
demand and price for sheep products in many markets sheep have distinct economic advantages when compared with other 
livestock they do not require the expensive housing such as that used in the intensive farming of chickens or pigs they 
are an efficient use of land roughly six sheep can be kept on the amount that would suffice for a single cow or horse 
sheep can also consume plants such as noxious weeds that most other animals will not touch and produce more young at a 
faster rate also in contrast to most livestock species the cost of raising sheep is not necessarily tied to the price of 
feed crops such as grain soybeans and corn combined with the lower cost of quality sheep all these factors combine to 
equal a lower overhead for sheep producers thus entailing a higher profitability potential for the small farmer sheep 
are especially beneficial for independent producers including family farms with limited resources as the sheep industry 
is one of the few types of animal agriculture that has not been vertically integrated by agribusiness food sheep meat 
and milk were one of the earliest staple proteins consumed by human civilization after the transition from hunting and 
gathering to agriculture sheep meat prepared for food is known as either mutton or lamb mutton is derived from the old 
french moton which was the word for sheep used by the anglonorman rulers of much of the british isles in the middle ages 
this became the name for sheep meat in english while the old english word sceap was kept for the live animal throughout 
modern history mutton has been limited to the meat of mature sheep usually at least two years of age lamb is used for 
that of immature sheep less than a year in the st century the nations with the highest consumption of sheep meat are the 
arab states of the persian gulf new zealand australia greece uruguay the united kingdom and ireland these countries eat 
lbs kg of sheep meat per capita per annum sheep meat is also popular in france africa especially the maghreb the 
caribbean the rest of the middle east india and parts of china this often reflects a history of sheep production in 
these countries in particular dishes comprising alternative cuts and offal may be popular or traditional sheep 
testiclescalled animelles or lamb friesare considered a delicacy in many parts of the world perhaps the most unusual 
dish of sheep meat is the scottish haggis composed of various sheep innards cooked along with oatmeal and chopped onions 
inside its stomach in comparison countries such as the us consume only a pound or less under kg with americans eating 
pounds kg of pork and pounds kg of beef in addition such countries rarely eat mutton and may favor the more expensive 
cuts of lamb mostly lamb chops and leg of lamb though sheeps milk may be drunk rarely in fresh form today it is used 
predominantly in cheese and yogurt making sheep have only two teats and produce a far smaller volume of milk than cows 
however as sheeps milk contains far more fat solids and minerals than cows milk it is ideal for the cheesemaking process 
it also resists contamination during cooling better because of its much higher calcium content wellknown cheeses made 
from sheep milk include the feta of bulgaria and greece roquefort of france manchego from spain the pecorino romano the 
italian word for sheep is pecore and ricotta of italy yogurts especially some forms of strained yogurt may also be made 
from sheep milk many of these products are now often made with cows milk especially when produced outside their country 
of origin sheep milk contains lactose which may affect those who are intolerant as with other domestic animals the meat 
of uncastrated males is inferior in quality especially as they grow a bucky lamb is a lamb which was not castrated early 
enough or which was castrated improperly resulting in one testicle being retained these lambs are worth less at market 
science sheep are generally too large and reproduce too slowly to make ideal research subjects and thus are not a common 
model organism they have however played an influential role in some fields of science in particular the roslin institute 
of edinburgh scotland used sheep for genetics research that produced groundbreaking results in two ewes named megan and 
morag were the first mammals cloned from differentiated cells a year later a finnish dorset sheep named dolly dubbed the 
worlds most famous sheep in scientific american was the first mammal to be cloned from an adult somatic cell following 
this polly and molly were the first mammals to be simultaneously cloned and transgenic as of the sheep genome has not 
been fully sequenced although a detailed genetic map has been published and a draft version of the complete genome 
produced by assembling sheep dna sequences using information given by the genomes of other mammals in a transgenic sheep 
named peng peng was cloned by chinese scientists who spliced his genes with that of a roundworm c elegans in order to 
increase production of fats healthier for human consumption in the study of natural selection the population of soay 
sheep that remain on the island of hirta have been used to explore the relation of body size and coloration to 
reproductive success soay sheep come in several colors and researchers investigated why the larger darker sheep were in 
decline this occurrence contradicted the rule of thumb that larger members of a population tend to be more successful 
reproductively the feral soays on hirta are especially useful subjects because they are isolated sheep are one of the 
few animals where the molecular basis of the diversity of male sexual preferences has been examined however this 
research has been controversial and much publicity has been produced by a study at the oregon health and science 
university that investigated the mechanisms that produce homosexuality in rams organizations such as peta campaigned 
against the study accusing scientists of trying to cure homosexuality in the sheep ohsu and the involved scientists 
vehemently denied such accusations domestic sheep are sometimes used in medical research particularly for researching 
cardiovascular physiology in areas such as hypertension and heart failure pregnant sheep are also a useful model for 
human pregnancy and have been used to investigate the effects on fetal development of malnutrition and hypoxia in 
behavioral sciences sheep have been used in isolated cases for the study of facial recognition as their mental process 
of recognition is qualitatively similar to humans cultural impact sheep have had a strong presence in many cultures 
especially in areas where they form the most common type of livestock in the english language to call someone a sheep or 
ovine may allude that they are timid and easily led if not outright stupid in contradiction to this image male sheep are 
often used as symbols of virility and power although the logos of the st louis rams and the dodge ram allude 
specifically to males of the species bighorn sheep ovis canadensis sheep are key symbols in fables and nursery rhymes 
like the wolf in sheeps clothing little bo peep baa baa black sheep and mary had a little lamb novels such as george 
orwells animal farm haruki murakamis a wild sheep chase thomas hardys far from the madding crowd neil astleys the sheep 
who changed the world which features a cloned sheep and leonie swanns three bags full a sheep detective story utilize 
sheep as characters or plot devices poems like william blakes the lamb songs such as pink floyds sheep and bachs aria 
sheep may safely graze schafe knnen sicher weiden use sheep for metaphorical purposes in more recent popular culture the 
film black sheep exploits sheep for horror and comedic effect ironically turning them into bloodthirsty killers counting 
sheep is popularly said to be an aid to sleep and some ancient systems of counting sheep persist today sheep also enter 
in colloquial sayings and idiom frequently with such phrases as black sheep to call an individual a black sheep implies 
that they are an odd or disreputable member of a group this usage derives from the recessive trait that causes an 
occasional black lamb to be born into an entirely white flock these black sheep were considered undesirable by shepherds 
as black wool is not as commercially viable as white wool citizens who accept overbearing governments have been referred 
to by the portmanteau neologism of sheeple somewhat differently the adjective sheepish is also used to describe 
embarrassment religion and folklore in antiquity symbolism involving sheep cropped up in religions in the ancient near 
east the mideast and the mediterranean area atalhyk ancient egyptian religion the canaanite and phoenician tradition 
judaism greek religion and others religious symbolism and ritual involving sheep began with some of the first known 
faiths skulls of rams along with bulls occupied central placement in shrines at the atalhyk settlement in bce in ancient 
egyptian religion the ram was the symbol of several gods khnum heryshaf and amun in his incarnation as a god of 
fertility other deities occasionally shown with ram features include the goddess ishtar the phoenician god baalhamon and 
the babylonian god eaoannes in madagascar sheep were not eaten as they were believed to be incarnations of the souls of 
ancestors there are also many ancient greek references to sheep that of chrysomallos the goldenfleeced ram continuing to 
be told through into the modern era astrologically aries the ram is the first sign of the classical greek zodiac and the 
sheep is also the eighth of the twelve animals associated with the year cycle of in the chinese zodiac related to the 
chinese calendar in mongolia shagai are an ancient form of dice made from the cuboid bones of sheep that are often used 
for fortunetelling purposes sheep play an important role in all the abrahamic faiths abraham isaac jacob moses king 
david and the islamic prophet muhammad were all shepherds according to the biblical story of the binding of isaac a ram 
is sacrificed as a substitute for isaac after an angel stays abrahams hand in the islamic tradition abraham was about to 
sacrifice ishmael eid aladha is a major annual festival in islam in which sheep or other animals are sacrificed in 
remembrance of this act sheep are also occasionally sacrificed to commemorate important secular events in islamic 
cultures greeks and romans also sacrificed sheep regularly in religious practice and judaism also once sacrificed sheep 
as a korban sacrifice such as the passover lamb ovine symbolssuch as the ceremonial blowing of a shofarstill find a 
presence in modern judaic traditions followers of christianity are collectively often referred to as a flock with christ 
as the good shepherd and sheep are an element in the christian iconography of the birth of jesus some christian saints 
are considered patrons of shepherds and even of sheep themselves christ is also portrayed as the sacrificial lamb of god 
agnus dei and easter celebrations in greece and romania traditionally feature a meal of paschal lamb in many christian 
traditions a church leader is called the pastor which is derived from the latin word for shepherd see also dry sheep 
equivalent history of the domestic sheep sheepfold shrek sheep sonny wool venray sheep companies references sources 
budiansky stephen the covenant of the wild why animals chose domestication yale university press isbn ensminger dr me dr 
ro parker sheep and goat science fifth edition danville illinois the interstate printers and publishers inc isbn x pugh 
david g sheep goat medicine elsevier health sciences isbn simmons paula carol ekarius storeys guide to raising sheep 
north adams ma storey publishing llc isbn smith ms barbara mark aseltine phd gerald kennedy dvm beginning shepherds 
manual second edition ames iowa iowa state university press isbn x weaver sue sheep smallscale sheep keeping for 
pleasure and profit burroughs irvine ca hobby farm press an imprint of bowtie press a division of bowtie inc isbn 
wooster chuck living with sheep everything you need to know to raise your own flock geoff hansen photography guilford 
connecticut the lyons press isbn external links american sheep industry sheep industry queensland canadian sheep 
federation national sheep association uk new zealand sheepbreeders association sheep magazine all articles available 
free online view the sheep genome in ensembl