spiders order araneae are airbreathing arthropods that have eight legs and chelicerae with fangs that inject venom they 
are the largest order of arachnids and rank seventh in total species diversity among all other orders of organisms 
spiders are found worldwide on every continent except for antarctica and have become established in nearly every habitat 
with the exceptions of air and sea colonization as of at least spider species and families have been recorded by 
taxonomists however there has been dissension within the scientific community as to how all these families should be 
classified as evidenced by the over different classifications that have been proposed since anatomically spiders differ 
from other arthropods in that the usual body segments are fused into two tagmata the cephalothorax and abdomen and 
joined by a small cylindrical pedicel unlike insects spiders do not have antennae in all except the most primitive group 
the mesothelae spiders have the most centralized nervous systems of all arthropods as all their ganglia are fused into 
one mass in the cephalothorax unlike most arthropods spiders have no extensor muscles in their limbs and instead extend 
them by hydraulic pressure their abdomens bear appendages that have been modified into spinnerets that extrude silk from 
up to six types of silk glands within their abdomen spider webs vary widely in size shape and the amount of sticky 
thread used it now appears that the spiral orb web may be one of the earliest forms and spiders that produce tangled 
cobwebs are more abundant and diverse than orbweb spiders spiderlike arachnids with silkproducing spigots appeared in 
the devonian period about million years ago but these animals apparently lacked spinnerets true spiders have been found 
in carboniferous rocks from to million years ago and are very similar to the most primitive surviving order the 
mesothelae the main groups of modern spiders mygalomorphae and araneomorphae first appeared in the triassic period 
before million years ago a herbivorous species bagheera kiplingi was described in but all other known species are 
predators mostly preying on insects and on other spiders although a few large species also take birds and lizards 
spiders use a wide range of strategies to capture prey trapping it in sticky webs lassoing it with sticky bolas 
mimicking the prey to avoid detection or running it down most detect prey mainly by sensing vibrations but the active 
hunters have acute vision and hunters of the genus portia show signs of intelligence in their choice of tactics and 
ability to develop new ones spiders guts are too narrow to take solids and they liquidize their food by flooding it with 
digestive enzymes and grinding it with the bases of their pedipalps as they do not have true jaws male spiders identify 
themselves by a variety of complex courtship rituals to avoid being eaten by the females males of most species survive a 
few matings limited mainly by their short life spans females weave silk eggcases each of which may contain hundreds of 
eggs females of many species care for their young for example by carrying them around or by sharing food with them a 
minority of species are social building communal webs that may house anywhere from a few to individuals social behavior 
ranges from precarious toleration as in the widow spiders to cooperative hunting and foodsharing although most spiders 
live for at most two years tarantulas and other mygalomorph spiders can live up to years in captivity while the venom of 
a few species is dangerous to humans scientists are now researching the use of spider venom in medicine and as 
nonpolluting pesticides spider silk provides a combination of lightness strength and elasticity that is superior to that 
of synthetic materials and spider silk genes have been inserted into mammals and plants to see if these can be used as 
silk factories as a result of their wide range of behaviors spiders have become common symbols in art and mythology 
symbolizing various combinations of patience cruelty and creative powers an abnormal fear of spiders is called 
arachnophobia description body plan spiders are chelicerates and therefore arthropods as arthropods they have segmented 
bodies with jointed limbs all covered in a cuticle made of chitin and proteins heads that are composed of several 
segments that fuse during the development of the embryo being chelicerates their bodies consist of two tagmata sets of 
segments that serve similar functions the foremost one called the cephalothorax or prosoma is a complete fusion of the 
segments that in an insect would form two separate tagmata the head and thorax the rear tagma is called the abdomen or 
opisthosoma in spiders the cephalothorax and abdomen are connected by a small cylindrical section the pedicel the 
pattern of segment fusion that forms chelicerates heads is unique among arthropods and what would normally be the first 
head segment disappears at an early stage of development so that chelicerates lack the antennae typical of most 
arthropods in fact chelicerates only appendages ahead of the mouth are a pair of chelicerae and they lack anything that 
would function directly as jaws the first appendages behind the mouth are called pedipalps and serve different functions 
within different groups of chelicerates spiders and scorpions are members of one chelicerate group the arachnids 
scorpions chelicerae have three sections and are used in feeding spiders chelicerae have two sections and terminate in 
fangs that are generally venomous and fold away behind the upper sections while not in use the upper sections generally 
have thick beards that filter solid lumps out of their food as spiders can take only liquid food scorpions pedipalps 
generally form large claws for capturing prey while those of spiders are fairly small appendages whose bases also act as 
an extension of the mouth in addition those of male spiders have enlarged last sections used for sperm transfer in 
spiders the cephalothorax and abdomen are joined by a small cylindrical pedicel which enables the abdomen to move 
independently when producing silk the upper surface of the cephalothorax is covered by a single convex carapace while 
the underside is covered by two rather flat plates the abdomen is soft and eggshaped it shows no sign of segmentation 
except that the primitive mesothelae whose living members are the liphistiidae have segmented plates on the upper 
surface circulation and respiration like other arthropods spiders are coelomates in which the coelom is reduced to small 
areas round the reproductive and excretory systems its place is largely taken by a hemocoel a cavity that runs most of 
the length of the body and through which blood flows the heart is a tube in the upper part of the body with a few ostia 
that act as nonreturn valves allowing blood to enter the heart from the hemocoel but prevent it from leaving before it 
reaches the front end however in spiders it occupies only the upper part of the abdomen and blood is discharged into the 
hemocoel by one artery that opens at the rear end of the abdomen and by branching arteries that pass through the pedicle 
and open into several parts of the cephalothorax hence spiders have open circulatory systems the blood of many spiders 
that have book lungs contains the respiratory pigment hemocyanin to make oxygen transport more efficient spiders have 
developed several different respiratory anatomies based on book lungs a tracheal system or both mygalomorph and 
mesothelae spiders have two pairs of book lungs filled with haemolymph where openings on the ventral surface of the 
abdomen allow air to enter and diffuse oxygen this is also the case for some basal araneomorph spiders like the family 
hypochilidae but the remaining members of this group have just the anterior pair of book lungs intact while the 
posterior pair of breathing organs are partly or fully modified into tracheae through which oxygen is diffused into the 
haemolymph or directly to the tissue and organs the trachea system has most likely evolved in small ancestors to help 
resist desiccation the trachea were originally connected to the surroundings through a pair of openings called spiracles 
but in the majority of spiders this pair of spiracles has fused into a single one in the middle and moved backwards 
close to the spinnerets spiders that have tracheae generally have higher metabolic rates and better water conservation 
spiders are ectotherms so environmental temperatures affect their activity feeding digestion and excretion uniquely 
among chelicerates the final sections of spiders chelicerae are fangs and the great majority of spiders can use them to 
inject venom into prey from venom glands in the roots of the chelicerae the family uloboridae has lost its venom glands 
and kills its prey with silk instead like most arachnids including scorpions spiders have a narrow gut that can only 
cope with liquid food and spiders have two sets of filters to keep solids out they use one of two different systems of 
external digestion some pump digestive enzymes from the midgut into the prey and then suck the liquified tissues of the 
prey into the gut eventually leaving behind the empty husk of the prey others grind the prey to pulp using the 
chelicerae and the bases of the pedipalps while flooding it with enzymes in these species the chelicerae and the bases 
of the pedipalps form a preoral cavity that holds the food they are processing the stomach in the cephalothorax acts as 
a pump that sends the food deeper into the digestive system the mid gut bears many digestive ceca compartments with no 
other exit that extract nutrients from the food most are in the abdomen which is dominated by the digestive system but a 
few are found in the cephalothorax most spiders convert nitrogenous waste products into uric acid which can be excreted 
as a dry material malphigian tubules little tubes extract these wastes from the blood in the hemocoel and dump them into 
the cloacal chamber from which they are expelled through the anus production of uric acid and its removal via malphigian 
tubules are a waterconserving feature that has evolved independently in several arthropod lineages that can live far 
away from water for example the tubules of insects and arachnids develop from completely different parts of the embryo 
however a few primitive spiders the suborder mesothelae and infraorder mygalomorphae retain the ancestral arthropod 
nephridia little kidneys which use large amounts of water to excrete nitrogenous waste products as ammonia central 
nervous system the basic arthropod central nervous system consists of a pair of nerve cords running below the gut with 
paired ganglia as local control centers in all segments a brain formed by fusion of the ganglia for the head segments 
ahead of and behind the mouth so that the esophagus is encircled by this conglomeration of ganglia except for the 
primitive mesothelae of which the liphistiidae are the sole surviving family spiders have the much more centralized 
nervous system that is typical of arachnids all the ganglia of all segments behind the esophagus are fused so that the 
cephalothorax is largely filled with nervous tissue and there are no ganglia in the abdomen in the mesothelae the 
ganglia of the abdomen and the rear part of the cephalothorax remain unfused sense organs eyes most spiders have four 
pairs of eyes on the topfront area of the cephalothorax arranged in patterns that vary from one family to another the 
pair at the front are of the type called pigmentcup ocelli little eyes which in most arthropods are only capable of 
detecting the direction from which light is coming using the shadow cast by the walls of the cup however the main eyes 
at the front of spiders heads are pigmentcup ocelli that are capable of forming images the other eyes are thought to be 
derived from the compound eyes of the ancestral chelicerates but no longer have the separate facets typical of compound 
eyes unlike the main eyes in many spiders these secondary eyes detect light reflected from a reflective tapetum lucidum 
and wolf spiders can be spotted by torch light reflected from the tapeta on the other hand jumping spiders secondary 
eyes have no tapeta some jumping spiders visual acuity exceeds by a factor of ten that of dragonflies which have by far 
the best vision among insects in fact the human eye is only about five times sharper than a jumping spiders they achieve 
this by a telephotolike series of lenses a fourlayer retina and the ability to swivel their eyes and integrate images 
from different stages in the scan the downside is that the scanning and integrating processes are relatively slow other 
senses as with other arthropods spiders cuticles would block out information about the outside world except that they 
are penetrated by many sensors or connections from sensors to the nervous system in fact spiders and other arthropods 
have modified their cuticles into elaborate arrays of sensors various touch sensors mostly bristles called setae respond 
to different levels of force from strong contact to very weak air currents chemical sensors provide equivalents of taste 
and smell often by means of setae pedipalps carry a large number of such setae sensitive to contact chemicals and 
airborne smells such as female pheromones spiders also have in the joints of their limbs slit sensillae that detect 
forces and vibrations in webbuilding spiders all these mechanical and chemical sensors are more important than the eyes 
while the eyes are most important to spiders that hunt actively like most arthropods spiders lack balance and 
acceleration sensors and rely on their eyes to tell them which way is up arthropods proprioceptors sensors that report 
the force exerted by muscles and the degree of bending in the body and joints are well understood on the other hand 
little is known about what other internal sensors spiders or other arthropods may have locomotion each of the eight legs 
of a spider consists of seven distinct parts the part closest to and attaching the leg to the cephalothorax is the coxa 
the next segment is the short trochanter that works as a hinge for the following long segment the femur next is the 
spiders knee the patella which acts as the hinge for the tibia the metatarsus is next and it connects the tibia to the 
tarsus which may be thought of as a foot of sorts the tarsus ends in a claw made up of either two or three points 
depending on the family to which the spider belongs although all arthropods use muscles attached to the inside of the 
exoskeleton to flex their limbs spiders and a few other groups still use hydraulic pressure to extend them a system 
inherited from their prearthropod ancestors the only extensor muscles in spider legs are located in the three hip joints 
bordering the coxa and the trochanter as a result a spider with a punctured cephalothorax cannot extend its legs and the 
legs of dead spiders curl up spiders can generate pressures up to eight times their resting level to extend their legs 
and jumping spiders can jump up to times their own length by suddenly increasing the blood pressure in the third or 
fourth pair of legs although larger spiders use hydraulics to straighten their legs unlike smaller jumping spiders they 
depend on their flexor muscles to generate the propulsive force for their jumps most spiders that hunt actively rather 
than relying on webs have dense tufts of fine hairs between the paired claws at the tips of their legs these tufts known 
as scopulae consist of bristles whose ends are split into as many as branches and enable spiders with scopulae to walk 
up vertical glass and upside down on ceilings it appears that scopulae get their grip from contact with extremely thin 
layers of water on surfaces spiders like most other arachnids keep at least four legs on the surface while walking or 
running silk production the abdomen has no appendages except those that have been modified to form one to four usually 
three pairs of short movable spinnerets which emit silk each spinneret has many spigots each of which is connected to 
one silk gland there are at least six types of silk gland each producing a different type of silk silk is mainly 
composed of a protein very similar to that used in insect silk it is initially a liquid and hardens not by exposure to 
air but as a result of being drawn out which changes the internal structure of the protein it is similar in tensile 
strength to nylon and biological materials such as chitin collagen and cellulose but is much more elastic in other words 
it can stretch much further before breaking or losing shape some spiders have a cribellum a modified spinneret with up 
to spigots each of which produces a single very fine fiber the fibers are pulled out by the calamistrum a comblike set 
of bristles on the jointed tip of the cribellum and combined into a composite woolly thread that is very effective in 
snagging the bristles of insects the earliest spiders had cribella which produced the first silk capable of capturing 
insects before spiders developed silk coated with sticky droplets however most modern groups of spiders have lost the 
cribellum tarantulas also have silk glands in their feet even species that do not build webs to catch prey use silk in 
several ways as wrappers for sperm and for fertilized eggs as a safety rope for nestbuilding and as parachutes by the 
young of some species reproduction and life cycle spiders reproduce sexually and fertilization is internal but indirect 
in other words the sperm is not inserted into the females body by the males genitals but by an intermediate stage unlike 
many landliving arthropods male spiders do not produce readymade spermatophores packages of sperm but spin small sperm 
webs on to which they ejaculate and then transfer the sperm to syringelike structures on the tips of their pedipalps 
when a male detects signs of a female nearby he checks whether she is of the same species and whether she is ready to 
mate for example in species that produce webs or safety ropes the male can identify the species and sex of these objects 
by smell spiders generally use elaborate courtship rituals to prevent the large females from eating the small males 
before fertilization except where the male is so much smaller that he is not worth eating in webweaving species precise 
patterns of vibrations in the web are a major part of the rituals while patterns of touches on the females body are 
important in many spiders that hunt actively and may hypnotize the female gestures and dances by the male are important 
for jumping spiders which have excellent eyesight if courtship is successful the male injects his sperm from the 
pedipalps into the females genital opening known as the epigyne on the underside of her abdomen females reproductive 
tracts vary from simple tubes to systems that include seminal receptacles in which females store sperm and release it 
when they are ready males of the genus tidarren amputate one of their palps before maturation and enter adult life with 
one palp only the palps are of males body mass in this species and detaching one of the two improves mobility in the 
yemeni species tidarren argo the remaining palp is then torn off by the female the separated palp remains attached to 
the females epigynum for about four hours and apparently continues to function independently in the meantime the female 
feeds on the palpless male in over of cases the female of the australian redback spider kills and eats the male after it 
inserts its second palp into the females genital opening in fact the males cooperate by trying to impale themselves on 
the females fangs observation shows that most male redbacks never get an opportunity to mate and the lucky ones increase 
the likely number of offspring by ensuring that the females are wellfed however males of most species survive a few 
matings limited mainly by their short life spans some even live for a while in their mates webs females lay up to eggs 
in one or more silk egg sacs which maintain a fairly constant humidity level in some species the females die afterwards 
but females of other species protect the sacs by attaching them to their webs hiding them in nests carrying them in the 
chelicerae or attaching them to the spinnerets and dragging them along baby spiders pass all their larval stages inside 
the egg and hatch as spiderlings very small and sexually immature but similar in shape to adults some spiders care for 
their young for example a wolf spiders brood cling to rough bristles on the mothers back and females of some species 
respond to the begging behaviour of their young by giving them their prey provided it is no longer struggling or even 
regurgitate food like other arthropods spiders have to molt to grow as their cuticle skin cannot stretch in some species 
males mate with newly molted females which are too weak to be dangerous to the males most spiders live for only one to 
two years although some tarantulas can live in captivity for over years size spiders occur in a large range of sizes the 
smallest patu digua from colombia are less than mm in in body length the largest and heaviest spiders occur among 
tarantulas which can have body lengths up to mm in and leg spans up to mm in coloration only three classes of pigment 
ommochromes bilins and guanine have been identified in spiders although other pigments have been detected but not yet 
characterized melanins carotenoids and pterins very common in other animals are apparently absent in some species the 
exocuticle of the legs and prosoma is modified by a tanning process resulting in brown coloration bilins are found for 
example in micrommata virescens resulting in its green color guanine is responsible for the white markings of the 
european garden spider araneus diadematus it is in many species accumulated in specialized cells called guanocytes in 
genera such as tetragnatha leucauge argyrodes or theridiosoma guanine creates their silvery appearance while guanine is 
originally an endproduct of protein metabolism its excretion can be blocked in spiders leading to an increase in its 
storage structural colors occur in some species which are the result of the diffraction scattering or interference of 
light for example by modified setae or scales the white prosoma of argiope results from hairs reflecting the light 
lycosa and josa both have areas of modified cuticle that act as light reflectors ecology and behavior nonpredatory 
feeding although spiders are generally regarded as predatory the jumping spider bagheera kiplingi gets over of its food 
from fairly solid plant material produced by acacias as part of a mutually beneficial relationship with a species of ant 
juveniles of some spiders in the families anyphaenidae corinnidae clubionidae thomisidae and salticidae feed on plant 
nectar laboratory studies show that they do so deliberately and over extended periods and periodically clean themselves 
while feeding these spiders also prefer sugar solutions to plain water which indicates that they are seeking nutrients 
since many spiders are nocturnal the extent of nectar consumption by spiders may have been underestimated nectar 
contains amino acids lipids vitamins and minerals in addition to sugars and studies have shown that other spider species 
live longer when nectar is available feeding on nectar avoids the risks of struggles with prey and the costs of 
producing venom and digestive enzymes various species are known to feed on dead arthropods scavenging web silk and their 
own shed exoskeletons pollen caught in webs may also be eaten and studies have shown that young spiders have a better 
chance of survival if they have the opportunity to eat pollen in captivity several spider species are also known to feed 
on bananas marmalade milk egg yolk and sausages methods of capturing prey the bestknown method of prey capture is by 
means of sticky webs varying placement of webs allows different species of spider to trap different insects in the same 
area for example flat horizontal webs trap insects that fly up from vegetation underneath while flat vertical webs trap 
insects in horizontal flight webbuilding spiders have poor vision but are extremely sensitive to vibrations females of 
the water spider argyroneta aquatica build underwater diving bell webs which they fill with air and use for digesting 
prey molting mating and raising offspring they live almost entirely within the bells darting out to catch prey animals 
that touch the bell or the threads that anchor it a few spiders use the surfaces of lakes and ponds as webs detecting 
trapped insects by the vibrations that these cause while struggling netcasting spiders weave only small webs but then 
manipulate them to trap prey those of the genus hyptiotes and the family theridiosomatidae stretch their webs and then 
release them when prey strike them but do not actively move their webs those of the family deinopidae weave even smaller 
webs hold them outstretched between their first two pairs of legs and lunge and push the webs as much as twice their own 
body length to trap prey and this move may increase the webs area by a factor of up to ten experiments have shown that 
deinopis spinosus has two different techniques for trapping prey backwards strikes to catch flying insects whose 
vibrations it detects and forward strikes to catch groundwalking prey that it sees these two techniques have also been 
observed in other deinopids walking insects form most of the prey of most deinopids but one population of deinopis 
subrufa appears to live mainly on tipulid flies that they catch with the backwards strike mature female bolas spiders of 
the genus mastophora build webs that consist of only a single trapeze line which they patrol they also construct a bolas 
made of a single thread tipped with a large ball of very wet sticky silk they emit chemicals that resemble the 
pheromones of moths and then swing the bolas at the moths although they miss on about of strikes they catch about the 
same weight of insects per night as webweaving spiders of similar size the spiders eat the bolas if they have not made a 
kill in about minutes rest for a while and then make new bolas juveniles and adult males are much smaller and do not 
make bolas instead they release different pheromones that attract moth flies and catch them with their front pairs of 
legs the primitive liphistiidae the trapdoor spiders family ctenizidae and many tarantulas are ambush predators that 
lurk in burrows often closed by trapdoors and often surrounded by networks of silk threads that alert these spiders to 
the presence of prey other ambush predators do without such aids including many crab spiders and a few species that prey 
on bees which see ultraviolet can adjust their ultraviolet reflectance to match the flowers in which they are lurking 
wolf spiders jumping spiders fishing spiders and some crab spiders capture prey by chasing it and rely mainly on vision 
to locate prey some jumping spiders of the genus portia hunt other spiders in ways that seem intelligent outflanking 
their victims or luring them from their webs laboratory studies show that portias instinctive tactics are only starting 
points for a trialanderror approach from which these spiders learn very quickly how to overcome new prey species however 
they seem to be relatively slow thinkers which is not surprising as their brains are vastly smaller than those of 
mammalian predators antmimicking spiders face several challenges they generally develop slimmer abdomens and false 
waists in the cephalothorax to mimic the three distinct regions tagmata of an ants body they wave the first pair of legs 
in form to their heads to mimic antennae which spiders lack and to conceal the fact that they have eight legs rather 
than six they develop large color patches round one pair of eyes to disguise the fact that they generally have eight 
simple eyes while ants have two compound eyes they cover their bodies with reflective hairs to resemble the shiny bodies 
of ants in some spider species males and females mimic different ant species as female spiders are usually much larger 
than males antmimicking spiders also modify their behavior to resemble that of the target species of ant for example 
many adopt a zigzag pattern of movement antmimicking jumping spiders avoid jumping and spiders of the genus synemosyna 
walk on the outer edges of leaves in the same way as pseudomyrmex antmimicry in many spiders and other arthropods may be 
for protection from predators that hunt by sight including birds lizards and spiders however several antmimicking 
spiders prey either on ants or on the ants livestock such as aphids when at rest the antmimicking crab spider amyciaea 
does not closely resemble oecophylla but while hunting it imitates the behavior of a dying ant to attract worker ants 
after a kill some antmimicking spiders hold their victims between themselves and large groups of ants to avoid being 
attacked defense there is strong evidence that spiders coloration is camouflage that helps them to evade their major 
predators birds and parasitic wasps both of which have good color vision many spider species are colored so as to merge 
with their most common backgrounds and some have disruptive coloration stripes and blotches that break up their outlines 
in a few species such as the hawaiian happyface spider theridion grallator several coloration schemes are present in a 
ratio that appears to remain constant and this may make it more difficult for predators to recognize the species most 
spiders are insufficiently dangerous or unpleasanttasting for warning coloration to offer much benefit however a few 
species with powerful venoms large jaws or irritant hairs have patches of warning colors and some actively display these 
colors when threatened many of the family theraphosidae which includes tarantulas and baboon spiders have urticating 
hairs on their abdomens and use their legs to flick them at attackers these hairs are fine setae bristles with fragile 
bases and a row of barbs on the tip the barbs cause intense irritation but there is no evidence that they carry any kind 
of venom a few defend themselves against wasps by including networks of very robust threads in their webs giving the 
spider time to flee while the wasps are struggling with the obstacles the golden wheeling spider carparachne aureoflava 
of the namibian desert escapes parasitic wasps by flipping onto its side and cartwheeling down sand dunes social spiders 
a few species of spiders that build webs live together in large colonies and show social behavior although not as 
complex as in social insects anelosimus eximius in the family theridiidae can form colonies of up to individuals the 
genus anelosimus has a strong tendency towards sociality all known american species are social and species in madagascar 
are at least somewhat social members of other species in the same family but several different genera have independently 
developed social behavior for example although theridion nigroannulatum belongs to a genus with no other social species 
t nigroannulatum build colonies that may contain several thousand individuals that cooperate in prey capture and share 
food other communal spiders include several philoponella species family uloboridae agelena consociata family agelenidae 
and mallos gregalis family dictynidae social predatory spiders need to defend their prey against kleptoparasites thieves 
and larger colonies are more successful in this the herbivorous spider bagheera kiplingi lives in small colonies which 
help to protect eggs and spiderlings even widow spiders genus latrodectus which are notoriously cannibalistic have 
formed small colonies in captivity sharing webs and feeding together web types there is no consistent relationship 
between the classification of spiders and the types of web they build species in the same genus may build very similar 
or significantly different webs nor is there much correspondence between spiders classification and the chemical 
composition of their silks convergent evolution in web construction in other words use of similar techniques by remotely 
related species is rampant orb web designs and the spinning behaviors that produce them are the best understood the 
basic radialthenspiral sequence visible in orb webs and the sense of direction required to build them may have been 
inherited from the common ancestors of most spider groups however the majority of spiders build nonorb webs it used to 
be thought that the sticky orb web was an evolutionary innovation resulting in the diversification of the orbiculariae 
now however it appears that nonorb spiders are a subgroup that evolved from orbweb spiders and nonorb spiders have over 
more species and are four times as abundant as orbweb spiders their greater success may be because sphecid wasps which 
are often the dominant predators of spiders much prefer to attack spiders that have flat webs orb webs about half the 
potential prey that hit orb webs escape a web has to perform three functions intercepting the prey intersection 
absorbing its momentum without breaking stopping and trapping the prey by entangling it or sticking to it retention no 
single design is best for all prey for example wider spacing of lines will increase the webs area and hence its ability 
to intercept prey but reduce its stopping power and retention closer spacing larger sticky droplets and thicker lines 
would improve retention but would make it easier for potential prey to see and avoid the web at least during the day 
however there are no consistent differences between orb webs built for use during the day and those built for use at 
night in fact there is no simple relationship between orb web design features and the prey they capture as each 
orbweaving species takes a wide range of prey the hubs of orb webs where the spiders lurk are usually above the center 
as the spiders can move downwards faster than upwards if there is an obvious direction in which the spider can retreat 
to avoid its own predators the hub is usually offset towards that direction horizontal orb webs are fairly common 
despite being less effective at intercepting and retaining prey and more vulnerable to damage by rain and falling debris 
various researchers have suggested that horizontal webs offer compensating advantages such as reduced vulnerability to 
wind damage reduced visibility to prey flying upwards because of the backlighting from the sky enabling oscillations to 
catch insects in slow horizontal flight however there is no single explanation for the common use of horizontal orb webs 
spiders often attach highly visible silk bands called decorations or stabilimenta to their webs field research suggests 
that webs with more decorative bands captured more prey per hour however a laboratory study showed that spiders reduce 
the building of these decorations if they sense the presence of predators there are several unusual variants of orb web 
many of them convergently evolved including attachment of lines to the surface of water possibly to trap insects in or 
on the surface webs with twigs through their centers possibly to hide the spiders from predators ladderlike webs that 
appear most effective in catching moths however the significance of many variations is unclear in skylab took two orbweb 
spiders into space to test their webspinning capabilities in zero gravity at first both produced rather sloppy webs but 
they adapted quickly tangleweb spiders cobweb spiders members of the family theridiidae weave irregular tangled 
threedimensional webs popularly known as cobwebs there seems to be an evolutionary trend towards a reduction in the 
amount of sticky silk used leading to its total absence in some species the construction of cobwebs is less stereotyped 
than that of orbwebs and may take several days other types of webs the linyphiidae generally make horizontal but uneven 
sheets with tangles of stopping threads above insects that hit the stopping threads fall onto the sheet or are shaken 
onto it by the spider and are held by sticky threads on the sheet until the spider can attack from below evolution 
fossil record although the fossil record of spiders is considered poor almost species have been described from fossils 
because spiders bodies are quite soft the vast majority of fossil spiders have been found preserved in amber the oldest 
known amber that contains fossil arthropods dates from million years ago in the early cretaceous period in addition to 
preserving spiders anatomy in very fine detail pieces of amber show spiders mating killing prey producing silk and 
possibly caring for their young in a few cases amber has preserved spiders egg sacs and webs occasionally with prey 
attached the oldest fossil web found so far is million years old earlier spider fossils come from a few lagersttten 
places where conditions were exceptionally suited to preserving fairly soft tissues the oldest known arachnid is the 
trigonotarbid palaeotarbus jerami from about million years ago in the silurian period and had a triangular cephalothorax 
and segmented abdomen as well as eight legs and a pair of pedipalps attercopus fimbriunguis from million years ago in 
the devonian period bears the earliest known silkproducing spigots and was therefore hailed as a spider however these 
spigots may have been mounted on the underside of the abdomen rather than on spinnerets which are modified appendages 
and whose mobility is important in the building of webs hence attercopus and the similar permian arachnid permarachne 
may not have been true spiders and probably used silk for lining nests or producing eggcases rather than for building 
webs the largest known fossil spider as of is the araneid nephila jurassica from about million years ago recorded from 
daohuogo inner mongolia in china its body length is almost mm ie almost one inch several carboniferous spiders were 
members of the mesothelae a primitive group now represented only by the liphistiidae the mesothelid paleothele 
montceauensis from the late carboniferous over million years ago had five spinnerets although the permian period to 
million years ago saw rapid diversification of flying insects there are very few fossil spiders from this period the 
main groups of modern spiders mygalomorphae and araneomorphae first appear in the triassic well before million years ago 
some triassic mygalomorphs appear to be members of the family hexathelidae whose modern members include the notorious 
sydney funnelweb spider and their spinnerets appear adapted for building funnelshaped webs to catch jumping insects 
araneomorphae account for the great majority of modern spiders including those that weave the familiar orbshaped webs 
the jurassic and cretaceous periods provide a large number of fossil spiders including representatives of many modern 
families family tree it is now agreed that spiders araneae are monophyletic ie members of a group of organisms which 
form a clade consisting of a last common ancestor and all of its descendants there has been debate about what their 
closest evolutionary relatives are and how all of these evolved from the ancestral chelicerates which were marine 
animals the cladogram on the right is based on j w shultz analysis other views include proposals that scorpions are more 
closely related to the extinct marine scorpionlike eurypterids than to spiders spiders and amblypygi are a monophyletic 
group the appearance of several multiway branchings in the tree on the right shows that there are still uncertainties 
about relationships between the groups involved arachnids lack some features of other chelicerates including 
backwardpointing mouths and gnathobases jaw bases at the bases of their legs both of these features are part of the 
ancestral arthropod feeding system instead they have mouths that point forwards and downwards and all have some means of 
breathing air spiders araneae are distinguished from other arachnid groups by several characteristics including 
spinnerets and in males pedipalps that are specially adapted for sperm transfer taxonomy spiders are divided into two 
suborders mesothelae and opisthothelae of which the latter contains two infraorders mygalomorphae and araneomorphae over 
living species of spiders order araneae have been identified and are currently grouped into about families and about 
genera by arachnologists mesothelae the only living members of the primitive mesothelae are the family liphistiidae 
found only in southeast asia china and japan most of the liphistiidae construct silklined burrows with thin trapdoors 
although some species of the genus liphistius build camouflaged silk tubes with a second trapdoor as an emergency exit 
members of the genus liphistius run silk tripwires outwards from their tunnels to help them detect approaching prey 
while those of genus heptathela do not and instead rely on their builtin vibration sensors spiders of the genus 
heptathela have no venom glands although they do have venom gland outlets on the fang tip the extinct families 
arthrolycosidae found in carboniferous and permian rocks and arthromygalidae so far found only in carboniferous rocks 
have been classified as members of the mesothelae mygalomorphae the mygalomorphae which first appeared in the triassic 
period are generally heavily built and hairy with large robust chelicerae and fangs wellknown examples include 
tarantulas trapdoor spiders and the australasian funnelweb spiders most spend the majority of their time in burrows and 
some run silk tripwires out from these but a few build webs to capture prey however mygalomorphs cannot produce the 
pirifom silk that the araneomorphae use as instant adhesive to glue silk to surfaces or to other strands of silk and 
this makes web construction more difficult for mygalomorphs since mygalomorphs rarely balloon by using air currents for 
transport their populations often form clumps in addition to arthropods mygalomorphs are capable of preying on frogs 
small mammals lizards and snails araneomorphae in addition to accounting for over of spider species the araneomorphae 
also known as the true spiders include orbweb spiders the cursorial wolf spiders and jumping spiders as well as the only 
known herbivorous spider bagheera kiplingi they are distinguished by having fangs that oppose each other and cross in a 
pinching action in contrast to the mygalomorphae which have fangs that are nearly parallel in alignment spiders and 
people spider bites although spiders are widely feared only a few species are dangerous to people spiders will only bite 
humans in selfdefense and few produce worse effects than a mosquito bite or beesting most of those with medically 
serious bites such as recluse spiders and widow spiders would rather flee and bite only when trapped although this can 
easily arise by accident funnel web spiders defensive tactics include fang display and their venom although they rarely 
inject much has resulted in known human deaths over years they have been deemed to be the worlds most dangerous spiders 
on clinical and venom toxicity grounds though this claim has also been attributed to the brazilian wandering spider due 
to much more frequent accidents there were about reliably reported deaths from spider bites in the th century but about 
from jellyfish stings many alleged cases of spider bites may represent incorrect diagnoses which would make it more 
difficult to check the effectiveness of treatments for genuine bites benefits to humans spider venoms may be a less 
polluting alternative to conventional pesticides as they are deadly to insects but the great majority are harmless to 
vertebrates australian funnel web spiders are a promising source as most of the worlds insect pests have had no 
opportunity to develop any immunity to their venom and funnel web spiders thrive in captivity and are easy to milk it 
may be possible to target specific pests by engineering genes for the production of spider toxins into viruses that 
infect species such as cotton bollworms the chol maya use a beverage created with the tarantula species brachypelma 
vagans for the treatment of a condition they term tarantula wind the symptoms of which include chest pain asthma and 
coughing possible medical uses for spider venoms are being investigated for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmia 
alzheimers disease strokes and erectile dysfunction the peptide gsmtx found in the venom of brachypelma vagans is being 
researched to determine whether or not it could effectively be used for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmia muscular 
dystrophy or glioma because spider silk is both light and very strong attempts are being made to produce it in goats 
milk and in the leaves of plants by means of genetic engineering spiders can also be used as food cooked tarantula 
spiders are considered a delicacy in cambodia and by the piaroa indians of southern venezuela provided the highly 
irritant hairs the spiders main defense system are removed first arachnophobia arachnophobia is a specific phobiait is 
the abnormal fear of spiders or anything reminiscent of spiders such as webs or spiderlike shapes it is one of the most 
common specific phobias and some statistics show that of women and of men show symptoms it may be an exaggerated form of 
an instinctive response that helped early humans to survive or a cultural phenomenon that is most common in 
predominantly european societies spiders in symbolism and culture spiders have been the focus of stories and mythologies 
of various cultures for centuries they have symbolized patience due to their hunting technique of setting webs and 
waiting for prey as well as mischief and malice due to their venomous bites the italian tarantella is a dance to rid the 
young woman of the lustful effects of a spider bite webspinning also caused the association of the spider with creation 
myths as they seem to have the ability to produce their own worlds dreamcatchers are depictions of spiderwebs the moche 
people of ancient peru worshipped nature they placed emphasis on animals and often depicted spiders in their art see 
also endangered spiders identifying spiders spider diversity arachnidism toxins list of animals that produce silk 
footnotes bibliography ruppert e e fox r s and barnes r d invertebrate zoology ed brooks cole isbn further reading 
bilger burkhard march spider woman the new yorker a reporter at large column bristowe w s the world of spiders taplinger 
publishing company isbn oclc crompton john the life of the spider new york mentor oclc hillyard paul the book of the 
spider from arachnophobia to the love of spiders new york random house isbn oclc kaston b j elizabeth kaston how to know 
the spiders picturedkeys for determining the more common spiders with suggestions for collecting and studying them st ed 
dubuque iowa w c brown company oclc main barbara york spiders sydney collins isbn oclc wise david a spiders in 
ecological webs cambridge studies in ecology cambridge uk cambridge university press isbn oclc external links spiders at 
dmoz picture story about the jumping spider aelurillus vinsignitus new mexico state university the spiders of the arid 
southwest online videos of jumping spiders salticids and other arachnids spider at the encyclopedia of life list of 
field guides to spiders from the international field guides database spider hunts on youtube