
turtles are reptiles of the order testudines or chelonii characterised by a special bony or cartilaginous shell 
developed from their ribs and acting as a shield turtle may refer to the order as a whole american english or to 
freshwater and seadwelling testudines british english the order testudines includes both extant living and extinct 
species the earliest known turtles date from million years ago making turtles one of the oldest reptile groups and a 
more ancient group than lizards snakes or crocodiles of the known species alive today some are highly endangered turtles 
are ectothermstheir internal temperature varies according to the ambient environment commonly called coldblooded however 
because of their high metabolic rate leatherback sea turtles have a body temperature that is noticeably higher than that 
of the surrounding water turtles are classified as amniotes along with other reptiles birds and mammals like other 
amniotes turtles breathe air and do not lay eggs underwater although many species live in or around water turtle 
tortoise or terrapin the word chelonian is popular among veterinarians scientists and conservationists working with 
these animals as a catchall name for any member of the superorder chelonia which includes all turtles living and extinct 
as well as their immediate ancestors chelonia is based on the greek word chelone tortoise turtle another relevant word 
is chelys tortoise also denoting armour or interlocking shields testudines on the other hand is based on the latin word 
testudo tortoise turtle may either refer to the order as a whole or to particular turtles which make up a form taxon 
that is not monophyletic the meaning of the word turtle differs from region to region in north america all chelonians 
are commonly called turtles including terrapins and tortoises in great britain the word turtle is used for seadwelling 
species but not for tortoises the term tortoise usually refers to any landdwelling nonswimming chelonian most 
landdwelling chelonians are in the testudinidae family only one of the extant turtle families terrapin is used to 
describe several species of small edible hardshell turtles typically those found in brackish waters and is an algonquian 
word for turtle some languages do not have this problem as all of these are referred to by the same name for example in 
spanish the word tortuga is used for turtles tortoises and terrapins a seadwelling turtle is tortuga marina a freshwater 
species tortuga de ro and a tortoise tortuga terrestre anatomy and morphology the largest living chelonian is the 
leatherback sea turtle dermochelys coriacea which reaches a shell length of cm ft and can reach a weight of over kg lb 
freshwater turtles are generally smaller but with the largest species the asian softshell turtle pelochelys cantorii a 
few individuals have been reported up to cm ft this dwarfs even the betterknown alligator snapping turtle the largest 
chelonian in north america which attains a shell length of up to cm ft and weighs as much as kg lb giant tortoises of 
the genera geochelone meiolania and others were relatively widely distributed around the world into prehistoric times 
and are known to have existed in north and south america australia and africa they became extinct at the same time as 
the appearance of man and it is assumed humans hunted them for food the only surviving giant tortoises are on the 
seychelles and galpagos islands and can grow to over cm in in length and weigh about kg lb the largest ever chelonian 
was archelon ischyros a late cretaceous sea turtle known to have been up to m ft long the smallest turtle is the 
speckled padloper tortoise of south africa it measures no more than cm in in length and weighs about g oz two other 
species of small turtles are the american mud turtles and musk turtles that live in an area that ranges from canada to 
south america the shell length of many species in this group is less than cm in in length neck withdrawral turtles are 
divided into two groups according to how they withdraw their necks into their shells something the ancestral 
proganochelys could not do the cryptodira withdraw their necks backwards while contracting it under their spine whereas 
the pleurodira contract their necks to the side head most turtles that spend most of their lives on land have their eyes 
looking down at objects in front of them some aquatic turtles such as snapping turtles and softshelled turtles have eyes 
closer to the top of the head these species of turtles can hide from predators in shallow water where they lie entirely 
submerged except for their eyes and nostrils near their eyes sea turtles possess glands that produce salty tears that 
rid their body of excess salt taken in from the water they drink turtles have rigid beaks and use their jaws to cut and 
chew food instead of having teeth which they appear to have lost about million years ago the upper and lower jaws of the 
turtle are covered by horny ridges carnivorous turtles usually have knifesharp ridges for slicing through their prey 
herbivorous turtles have serratededged ridges that help them cut through tough plants they use their tongues to swallow 
food but unlike most reptiles they cannot stick out their tongues to catch food shell the upper shell of the turtle is 
called the carapace the lower shell that encases the belly is called the plastron the carapace and plastron are joined 
together on the turtles sides by bony structures called bridges the inner layer of a turtles shell is made up of about 
bones that include portions of the backbone and the ribs meaning the turtle cannot crawl out of its shell in most 
turtles the outer layer of the shell is covered by horny scales called scutes that are part of its outer skin or 
epidermis scutes are made up of the fibrous protein keratin that also makes up the scales of other reptiles these scutes 
overlap the seams between the shell bones and add strength to the shell some turtles do not have horny scutes for 
example the leatherback sea turtle and the softshelled turtles have shells covered with leathery skin instead the rigid 
shell means turtles cannot breathe as other reptiles do by changing the volume of their chest cavities via expansion and 
contraction of the ribs instead they breathe in two ways first they employ buccal pumping pulling air into their mouths 
then pushing it into their lungs via oscillations of the floor of the throat secondly when the abdominal muscles that 
cover the posterior opening of the shell contract the internal volume of the shell increases drawing air into the lungs 
allowing these muscles to function in much the same way as the mammalian diaphragm the shape of the shell gives helpful 
clues about how a turtle lives most tortoises have a large domeshaped shell that makes it difficult for predators to 
crush the shell between their jaws one of the few exceptions is the african pancake tortoise which has a flat flexible 
shell that allows it to hide in rock crevices most aquatic turtles have flat streamlined shells which aid in swimming 
and diving american snapping turtles and musk turtles have small crossshaped plastrons that give them more efficient leg 
movement for walking along the bottom of ponds and streams the color of a turtles shell may vary shells are commonly 
colored brown black or olive green in some species shells may have red orange yellow or grey markings often spots lines 
or irregular blotches one of the most colorful turtles is the eastern painted turtle which includes a yellow plastron 
and a black or olive shell with red markings around the rim tortoises being landbased have rather heavy shells in 
contrast aquatic and softshelled turtles have lighter shells that help them avoid sinking in water and swim faster with 
more agility these lighter shells have large spaces called fontanelles between the shell bones the shells of leatherback 
sea turtles are extremely light because they lack scutes and contain many fontanelles it has been suggested by jackson 
that the turtle shell can function as ph buffer to endure through anoxic conditions such as winter periods trapped 
beneath ice or within anoxic mud at the bottom of ponds turtles utilize two general physiological mechanisms in the case 
of prolonged periods of anoxia it has been shown that the turtle shell both releases carbonate buffers and uptakes 
lactic acid skin and molting as mentioned above the outer layer of the shell is part of the skin each scute or plate on 
the shell corresponds to a single modified scale the remainder of the skin is composed of skin with much smaller scales 
similar to the skin of other reptiles turtles do not molt their skins all at once as snakes do but continuously in small 
pieces when turtles are kept in aquaria small sheets of dead skin can be seen in the water often appearing to be a thin 
piece of plastic having been sloughed off when the animals deliberately rub themselves against a piece of wood or stone 
tortoises also shed skin but dead skin is allowed to accumulate into thick knobs and plates that provide protection to 
parts of the body outside the shell by counting the rings formed by the stack of smaller older scutes on top of the 
larger newer ones it is possible to estimate the age of a turtle if one knows how many scutes are produced in a year 
this method is not very accurate partly because growth rate is not constant but also because some of the scutes 
eventually fall away from the shell limbs terrestrial tortoises have short sturdy feet tortoises are famous for moving 
slowly in part because of their heavy cumbersome shells which restrict stride length amphibious turtles normally have 
limbs similar to those of tortoises except the feet are webbed and often have long claws these turtles swim using all 
four feet in a way similar to the dog paddle with the feet on the left and right side of the body alternately providing 
thrust large turtles tend to swim less than smaller ones and the very big species such as alligator snapping turtles 
hardly swim at all preferring to walk along the bottom of the river or lake as well as webbed feet turtles have very 
long claws used to help them clamber onto riverbanks and floating logs upon which they bask male turtles tend to have 
particularly long claws and these appear to be used to stimulate the female while mating while most turtles have webbed 
feet some such as the pignosed turtle have true flippers with the digits being fused into paddles and the claws being 
relatively small these species swim in the same way as sea turtles do see below sea turtles are almost entirely aquatic 
and have flippers instead of feet sea turtles fly through the water using the upanddown motion of the front flippers to 
generate thrust the back feet are not used for propulsion but may be used as rudders for steering compared with 
freshwater turtles sea turtles have very limited mobility on land and apart from the dash from the nest to the sea as 
hatchlings male sea turtles normally never leave the sea females must come back onto land to lay eggs they move very 
slowly and laboriously dragging themselves forwards with their flippers behaviour senses turtles are thought to have 
exceptional night vision due to the unusually large number of rod cells in their retinas turtles have color vision with 
a wealth of cone subtypes with sensitivities ranging from the near ultraviolet uv a to red some land turtles have very 
poor pursuit movement abilities which are normally found only in predators that hunt quickmoving prey but carnivorous 
turtles are able to move their heads quickly to snap intelligence it has been reported that wood turtles are better than 
white rats at learning to navigate mazes case studies exist of turtles playing they do however have a very low 
encephalization quotient relative brain to body mass their hard shell enable them to live without fast reflexes and 
elaborate predator avoidance strategies in the laboratory turtles pseudemys nelsoni can learn novel operant tasks and 
have demonstrated a longterm memory of at least months ecology and life history although many turtles spend large 
amounts of their lives underwater all turtles and tortoises breathe air and must surface at regular intervals to refill 
their lungs they can also spend much or all of their lives on dry land aquatic respiration in australian freshwater 
turtles is currently being studied some species have large cloacal cavities that are lined with many fingerlike 
projections these projections called papillae have a rich blood supply and increase the surface area of the cloaca the 
turtles can take up dissolved oxygen from the water using these papillae in much the same way that fish use gills to 
respire like other reptiles turtles lay eggs which are slightly soft and leathery the eggs of the largest species are 
spherical while the eggs of the rest are elongated their albumen is white and contains a different protein from bird 
eggs such that it will not coagulate when cooked turtle eggs prepared to eat consist mainly of yolk in some species 
temperature determines whether an egg develops into a male or a female a higher temperature causes a female a lower 
temperature causes a male large numbers of eggs are deposited in holes dug into mud or sand they are then covered and 
left to incubate by themselves depending on the species the eggs will typically take days to hatch when the turtles 
hatch they squirm their way to the surface and head toward the water there are no known species in which the mother 
cares for her young sea turtles lay their eggs on dry sandy beaches immature sea turtles are not cared for by the adults 
turtles can take many years to reach breeding age and in many cases breed every few years rather than annually 
researchers have recently discovered a turtles organs do not gradually break down or become less efficient over time 
unlike most other animals it was found that the liver lungs and kidneys of a centenarian turtle are virtually 
indistinguishable from those of its immature counterpart this has inspired genetic researchers to begin examining the 
turtle genome for longevity genes a group of turtles is known as a bale diet a turtles diet varies greatly depending on 
the environment in which it lives adult turtles typically eat aquatic plants invertebrates such as insects snails and 
worms and have been reported to occasionally eat dead marine animals several small freshwater species are carnivorous 
eating small fish and a wide range of aquatic life however protein is essential to turtle growth and juvenile turtles 
are purely carnivorous sea turtles typically feed on jellyfish sponge and other softbodied organisms some species of sea 
turtle with stronger jaws have been observed to eat shellfish while some species such as the green sea turtle do not eat 
any meat at all and instead have a diet largely made up of algae systematics and evolution the first prototurtles are 
believed to have existed in the late triassic period of the mesozoic era about million years ago and their shell which 
has remained a remarkably stable body plan is thought to have evolved from bony extensions of their backbones and broad 
ribs that expanded and grew together to form a complete shell that offered protection at every stage of its evolution 
even when the bony component of the shell was not complete this is supported by fossils of the freshwater odontochelys 
semitestacea or halfshelled turtle with teeth from the late triassic which have been found near guangling in southwest 
china odontochelys displays a complete bony plastron and an incomplete carapace similar to an early stage of turtle 
embryonic development prior to this discovery the earliestknown fossil turtles were terrestrial and had a complete shell 
offering no clue to the evolution of this remarkable anatomical feature by the late jurassic turtles had radiated widely 
and their fossil history becomes easier to read their exact ancestry has been disputed it was believed they are the only 
surviving branch of the ancient evolutionary grade anapsida which includes groups such as procolophonids millerettids 
protorothyrids and pareiasaurs all anapsid skulls lack a temporal opening while all other extant amniotes have temporal 
openings although in mammals the hole has become the zygomatic arch the millerettids protorothyrids and pareiasaurs 
became extinct in the late permian period and the procolophonoids during the triassic however it was later suggested the 
anapsidlike turtle skull may be due to reversion rather than to anapsid descent more recent morphological phylogenetic 
studies with this in mind placed turtles firmly within diapsids slightly closer to squamata than to archosauria all 
molecular studies have strongly upheld the placement of turtles within diapsids some place turtles within archosauria or 
more commonly as a sister group to extant archosaurs though an analysis conducted by lyson et al recovered turtles as 
the sister group of lepidosaurs instead reanalysis of prior phylogenies suggests they classified turtles as anapsids 
both because they assumed this classification most of them studying what sort of anapsid turtles are and because they 
did not sample fossil and extant taxa broadly enough for constructing the cladogram testudines were suggested to have 
diverged from other diapsids between and million years ago though the debate is far from settled even the traditional 
placement of turtles outside diapsida cannot be ruled out at this point a combined analysis of morphological and 
molecular data conducted by lee found turtles to be anapsids though a relationship with archosaurs couldnt be 
statistically rejected similarly a morphological study conducted by lyson et al recovered them as anapsids most closely 
related to eunotosaurus a molecular analysis of nuclear genes from vertebrate taxa suggests that turtles are a sister 
group to birds and crocodiles the archosauria the date of separation of turtles and birds and crocodiles was estimated 
to be million years ago the most recent common ancestor of living turtles corresponding to the split between pleurodira 
and cryptodira was estimated to have occurred around million years ago this last estimate may conflict with the fossil 
record depending on whether the genus kayentachelys whose fossils date to around million years ago is the earliest known 
member of cryptodira or lies outside the least inclusive clade containing cryptodira and pleurodira through utilizing 
the first genomicscale phylogenetic analysis of ultraconserved elements uces to investigate the placement of turtles 
within reptiles crawford et al also suggest that turtles are a sister group to birds and crocodiles the archosauria the 
first genomewide phylogenetic analysis was completed by wang et al using the draft genomes of chelonia mydas and 
pelodiscus sinensis the team used the largest turtle data set to date in their analysis and concluded that turtles are 
likely a sister group of crocodilians and birds archosauria this placement within the diapsids suggests that the turtle 
lineage lost diapsid skull characteristics as it now possesses an anapsid skull the earliest known fully shelled turtle 
is the latetriassic proganochelys this genus already possessed many advanced turtle traits and thus probably indicates 
many millions of years of preceding turtle evolution it lacked the ability to pull its head into its shell had a long 
neck and had a long spiked tail ending in a club while this body form is similar to that of ankylosaurs it resulted from 
convergent evolution turtles are divided into two extant suborders the cryptodira and the pleurodira the cryptodira is 
the larger of the two groups and includes all the marine turtles the terrestrial tortoises and many of the freshwater 
turtles the pleurodira are sometimes known as the sidenecked turtles a reference to the way they withdraw their heads 
into their shells this smaller group consists primarily of various freshwater turtles classification of turtles order 
testudines genus xinjianchelys genus hangaiemys family thalassemydidae genus solnhofia genus thalassemys genus 
santanachelys family sinemydidae suborder pleurodira family araripemydidae superfamily pelomedusoides family 
bothremydidae family pelomedusidae african sideneck turtles family podocnemididae madagascan bigheaded and american 
sideneck river turtles family chelidae suborder cryptodira family solemydidae infraorder eucryptodira basal and incertae 
sedis sinemys wuerhoensis genus judithemys genus osteopygis genus planetochelys genus protochelydra genus platysternon 
family chelydridae snapping turtles family eurysternidae family macrobaenidae family plesiochelyidae family 
xinjiangchelyidae superfamily chelonioidea sea turtles family toxochelyidae family cheloniidae green sea turtles and 
relatives family dermochelyidae leatherback sea turtles superfamily testudinoidea family haichemydidae family 
lindholmemydidae family sinochelyidae family emydidae pond box and water turtles family geoemydidae asian river turtles 
asian leaf turtles asian box turtles and roofed turtles family testudinidae true tortoises superfamily trionychoidea 
family adocidae family carettochelyidae pignose turtles family dermatemydidae river turtles family kinosternidae mud 
turtles family trionychidae softshell turtles fossil record turtle fossils of hatchling and nestling size have been 
documented in the scientific literature paleontologists from north carolina state university have found the fossilized 
remains of the worlds largest turtle in a coal mine in colombia the specimen named as carbonemys cofrinii is around 
million years old and nearly ft long on a few rare occasions paleontologists have succeeded in unearthing large numbers 
of jurassic or cretaceous turtle skeletons accumulated in a single area the nemegt formation in mongolia the turtle 
graveyard in north dakota or the black mountain turtle layer in wyoming the most spectacular find of this kind to date 
occurred in in shanshan county in xinjiang where over a thousand ancient freshwater turtles apparently died after the 
last water hole in an area dried out during a major drought genomics turtles possess diverse chromosome numbers n and a 
myriad of chromosomal rearrangements have occurred during evolution in captivity turtles particularly small terrestrial 
and freshwater turtles are commonly kept as pets among the most popular are russian tortoises spurthighed tortoises and 
redeared sliders in the united states due to the ease of contracting salmonellosis through casual contact with turtles 
the us food and drug administration fda established a regulation in to discontinue the sale of turtles under in mm it is 
illegal in every state in the us for anyone to sell any turtles under inches cm long many stores and flea markets still 
sell small turtles due to a loophole in the fda regulation which allows turtles under in mm to be sold for educational 
purposes some states have other laws and regulations regarding possession of redeared sliders as pets because they are 
looked upon as invasive species or pests where they are not native but have been introduced through the pet trade as of 
july it is illegal in florida to sell any wild type redeared slider unusual color varieties such as albino and pastel 
redeared sliders which are derived from captive breeding are still allowed for sale as food traditional medicine and 
cosmetics the flesh of turtles calipash or calipee was and still is considered a delicacy in a number of cultures turtle 
soup has been a prized dish in angloamerican cuisine and still remains so in some parts of asia gopher tortoise stew was 
popular with some groups in florida turtles remain a part of the traditional diet on the island of grand cayman so much 
so that when wild stocks became depleted a turtle farm was established specifically to raise sea turtles for their meat 
the farm also releases specimens to the wild as part of an effort to repopulate the caribbean sea fat from turtles is 
also used in the caribbean and in mexico as a main ingredient in cosmetics marketed under its spanish name crema de 
tortuga turtle plastrons the part of the shell that covers a tortoise from the bottom are widely used in traditional 
chinese medicine according to statistics taiwan imports hundreds of tons of plastrons every year a popular medicinal 
preparation based on powdered turtle plastron and a variety of herbs is the guilinggao jelly these days though it is 
typically made with only herbal ingredients conservation status in february the tortoise and freshwater turtle 
specialist group published a report about the top species of turtles most likely to become extinct with a further 
species at very high risk of becoming extinct this list excludes sea turtles however both the leatherback and the kemps 
ridley would make the top list the report is due to be updated in four years time allowing to follow the evolution of 
the list between to of all of their species considered threatened turtles and tortoises are at a much higher risk of 
extinction than many other vertebrates of the species of freshwater and terrestrial turtles species are considered 
threatened are either endangered or critically endangered and is extinct of the species belonging to the testudinidae 
family species are threatened are either endangered or critically endangered is extinct in the wild and species are 
extinct of all tortoise species are either gone or almost gone asian species are the most endangered closely followed by 
the five endemic species from madagascar turtles face many threats including habitat destruction harvesting for 
consumption and the pet trade the high extinction risk for asian species is primarily due to the longterm unsustainable 
exploitation of turtles and tortoises for consumption and traditional chinese medicine and to a lesser extent for the 
international pet trade efforts have been made by chinese entrepreneurs to satisfy increasing demand for turtle meat as 
gourmet food and traditional medicine with farmed turtles instead of wildcaught ones according to a study published in 
over a thousand turtle farms operated in china turtle farms in oklahoma and louisiana raise turtles for export to china 
as well nonetheless wild turtles continue to be caught and sent to market in large number as well as to turtle farms to 
be used as breeding stock resulting in a situation described by conservationists as the asian turtle crisis in the words 
of the biologist george amato the amount and the volume of captured turtles vacuumed up entire species from areas in 
southeast asia even as biologists still did not know how many distinct turtle species live in the region about of asias 
tortoise and freshwater turtle species are estimated to have become threatened harvesting wild turtles is legal in a 
number of states in the usa in one of these states florida just a single seafood company in fort lauderdale was reported 
in as buying about pounds of softshell turtles a week the harvesters hunters are paid about a pound some manage to catch 
as many as turtles pounds on a good day some of the catch gets to the local restaurants while most of it is exported to 
asia the florida fish and wildlife conservation commission estimated in that around pounds of softshell turtles were 
exported each week via tampa international airport nonetheless the great majority of turtles exported from the usa are 
farm raised according to one estimate by the world chelonian trust about of million animals harvested in the us over a 
threeyear period november november were exported it has been estimated presumably over the same period that about of the 
us turtle exports go to peoples republic of china predominantly to hong kong another to taiwan and to mexico turtlesat 
is a smartphone app that has been developed in australia in honor of world turtle day to help in the conservation of 
fresh water turtles in australia the app will allow the user to identify turtles with a picture guide and the location 
of turtles using the phones gps to record sightings and help find hidden turtle nesting grounds the app has been 
developed because there has been a high per cent of decline of fresh water turtles in australia due to foxes droughts 
and urban development the aim of the app is to reduce the number of foxes and help with targeting feral animal control 
see also animal track cultural depictions of turtles symposium on turtle evolution notes references further reading 
pritchard peter charles howard encyclopedia of turtles neptune nj tfh publications isbn external links chelonian 
studbook collection and display of the weightssizes of captive turtles biogeography and phylogeny of the chelonia 
taxonomy maps new scientist article including video on how the turtle evolved its shell