der griechischen sprache by the german lexicographer franz passow first published in fourth edition which in turn was 
based on johann gottlob schneiders kritisches griechischdeutsches handwrterbuch it has served as the basis for all later 
lexicographical work on the ancient greek language such as the ongoing greekspanish dictionary project diccionario 
griegoespaol dge it was edited by henry george liddell robert scott henry stuart jones and roderick mckenzie and 
published by the oxford university press it is now conventionally referred to as liddell scott liddellscottjones or lsj 
and its three sizes are sometimes referred to as the little liddell the middle liddell and the big liddell or the great 
scott according to stuart joness preface to the ninth edition the creation of the lexicon was originally proposed by 
david alphonso talboys an oxford publisher it was published by the clarendon press at oxford rather than by talboys 
because he died before the first edition was complete the second through sixth editions appeared in and the first editor 
of the lsj henry george liddell was dean of christ church oxford and the father of alice liddell the eponymous alice of 
the writings of lewis carroll the eighth edition is the last edition published during liddells lifetime the lsj is 
sometimes compared and contrasted with a latin dictionary by lewis and short which was also published by oxford 
university press oup for comparisons between the two works see the article on lewis and shorts dictionary it is also 
sometimes compared with the bauer lexicon which is a similar work focused on the greek of the new testament condensed 
editions two condensed editions of lsj were published by oxford and remain in print in the same year as the full 
lexicons publication a lexicon abridged from liddell and scotts greekenglish lexicon sometimes called the little liddell 
was published several revised editions followed for example a reprint retypeset in of the edition is available from 
simon wallenberg press isbn in an intermediate edition of the lexicon an intermediate greekenglish lexicon was prepared 
on the basis of the seventh edition of lsj in comparison to the smaller abridgment this middle liddell contains more 
entries covering the essential vocabulary of most commonly read ancient greek literature adds citations of the authors 
to illustrate the history of greek usage without identifying the passages and provides more help with irregular forms 
the supplement after the publication of the ninth edition in shortly after the deaths of both stuart jones and mckenzie 
the oup maintained a list of addenda et corrigenda additions and corrections which was bound with subsequent printings 
however in these were replaced by a supplement to the lsj neither the addenda nor the supplement has ever been merged 
into the main text which still stands as originally composed by liddell scott jones and mckenzie the supplement was 
initially edited by m l west since it has been edited by p g w glare editor of the oxford latin dictionary not to be 
confused with lewis and short since it has been edited by glare and anne a thompson as the title page of the lexicon 
makes clear and the prefaces to the main text and to the supplement attest this editorial work has been performed with 
the cooperation of many scholars the supplement primarily takes the form of a list of additions and corrections to the 
main text sorted by entry the supplemental entries are marked with signs to show the nature of the changes they call for 
thus a user of the lexicon can consult the supplement after consulting the main text to see whether scholarship after 
jones and mckenzie has provided any new information about a particular word as of the most recent revision of the 
supplement published in contains pages of corrections to the main text as well as other materials here is a typical 
entry from the revised supplement x to be nchanged into a cow sfr a r the small x indicates that this word did not 
appear in the main text at all sfr refers to the collected fragmentary works of sophocles one interesting new source of 
lexicographic material in the revised supplement is the mycenean inscriptions the revised supplements preface notes at 
the time of the publication of the first supplement it was felt that the ventris decipherment of the linear b tablets 
was still too uncertain to warrant the inclusion of these texts in a standard dictionary ventriss interpretation is now 
generally accepted and the tablets can no longer be ignored in a comprehensive greek dictionary electronic editions the 
ninth edition of lsj has been freely available in electronic form since having been digitized by the perseus project 
diogenes a free software package incorporates the perseus data and allows easy offline consultation of lsj on mac os x 
windows and linux platforms marcion is another open source application that uses includes the perseus lsj for mobile 
devices both the palm handheld and the iphoneipod touch feature data ported from perseus the android market also 
currently offers the intermediate lsj as an offline downloadable app for a small price a cdrom version published and 
sold by logos bible software also incorporates the supplements additions to the ninth edition of lsj a new online 
version of lsj was released in by the thesaurus linguae graecae tlg the tlg version corrects a large number of 
typographical errors and includes links to the extensive tlg textual corpus a kindle version is also available allowing 
search from most classical greek wordforms and supporting a growing number of ancient classical greek texts for this 
device complete liddell scotts lexicon with inflections translations the lexicon has been translated into modern greek 
by anestis konstantinidis greek and was published on with the title h liddell r scott see also diccionario griegoespaol 
references external links electronic editions the online liddellscottjones greekenglish lexicon at the thesaurus linguae 
graecae lsj at perseus word study tool search headwords and english definitions browse text because it is not easy to 
computertypeset breves and macrons in greek the perseus transcription is for a short alpha and for a long alpha lsj at 
harvards archimedes project lsj at univ of chicago lsj in wiki format and diacritics insensitive search in greek and 
latin characters by translatum modern greek version of lsj by the university of the aegean lsj via the philologus online 
interface scanned copies seventh edition archiveorg american edition ed henry drisler archiveorg eighth edition 
archiveorg other links official home page of most recent print edition at the oxford university press